Transcribed from: 2017-clark-surfing.pdf
Method used: pdfplumber
==================================================

Minds&Machines
DOI10.1007/s11023-017-9420-y
Andy Clark, Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action,
and the Embodied Mind
New York: Oxford University Press, 2016, xviii + 401, $29.95,
ISBN 9780190217013
Matteo Colombo1
(CID:2)Springer Science+BusinessMediaDordrecht2017
Suppose you shut down your senses for a while. Suppose you decide to live with a
blindfold for one week. Or, more drastically, you decide to spend one week in a
dark, sound-proof, odorless tank, inside which you will float in salt water at
constant temperature. Youbelieveyouwillgainamuchneededpeaceofmind. You
willperceivenothing; youwillthinknothing. Afterthisperiod ofblissfuloblivion,
you will be ready to engage with the world again, with an external environment
whichconstantlybombardsyourhelplesssensorysystemswithabuzzingstreamof
sensory data. At least you believe that.
Butthisbeliefrestsonafundamentalmistake, accordingtoAndyClark’surfing
Uncertainty. Whatyouperceivedependsnotjustonthesensorydatathatyourbrain
receives from the environment; what you normally see, smell, and hear would also
dependoninternallygeneratedtop-downsignalsconveyingpriorexpectationsabout
the world. Whenyoutakeallthesensorystimulationaway, yourperceptiondoesnot
stop. It just gets stranger. People experiencing sensory deprivation for just a few
hours often report vivid hallucinations. They may see bright spots of light, faces,
landscapes, and colored patterns; they may hear arias, beats, and voices (e.g.,
Megabit et al. 2004; Mason and Brady 2009). Deprived of sensory data, the brain
spontaneously generates its own; and, restless, you begin to have finicky
perceptions.
Surfing Uncertainty isadelightfullywrittenbookthatshowshow thispictureof
the brain has far-reaching consequences for central questions in cognitive science,
philosophy, andneuroscience. Blendingresultsfromembodiedcognitionwithideas
and results from computational neuroscience and machine learning, Clark argues
that ‘‘the predictive brain ... is an action-oriented engagement machine, adept at
& Matteo Colombo
m.colombo@uvt.nl
1 TilburgCenterforLogic, EthicsandPhilosophyofScience, UniversityofTilburg,
POBox90153,5000LETilburg,The Netherlands
123
M. Colombo
finding efficient embodied solutions that make the most of body and world’’
(p. 300). Biological brains would not be passive receivers of sensory data, but
proactive machines:evolvedorgansconstantlytryingtopredicttheirownstreamsof
incoming sensory stimulation. To develop his argument, Clark synthesizes a large
body of work in embodied cognitive science and computational neuroscience. The
upshot of this synthesis is a unifying, principled theory of the embodied mind,
which Clark dubs Predictive Processing (PP).
Surfing Uncertainty is in three parts. Part I includes Chapters 1–3, where Clark
weavesavastarrayofresultsandconceptsfromdifferentcornersofcomputational
neuroscience and machine learning to lay bare the tenets of PP. While traditional
approaches depict perception as a passive, cumulative, bottom-up process of
progressively complex feature detection, PP understands perception as an active
process constituted by the ongoing interaction of top-down and bottom-up
processing. Chapter1beginstounpackthisideabyfocusingontwocomputational
building blocks of PP: prediction and prediction error. Clark explains that
hierarchically organized brains leverage these quantities to support adaptive action
andtomakesenseofinputdatathataresparse, noisy,and ambiguous. WhileClark
doesnotprovideaprecisedefinitionofthenotionofprediction(or expectation), he
warns readers that computing predictions involves no conscious, personal-level
judgement or homunculus; it requires only automatic, sub-personal operations
defined over physical states and events. As such, usage of ‘prediction’ picks out a
distinctivefunctionalroleinacomputationalsystemthatconstantlysolvesproblems
of statistical inference by trying to minimize the errors in its predictions.
Drawing on several ideas, examples and case studies, Clark explains that higher
levelcorticalareasinthebrainwouldencodepredictions, whicharebroadcastedby
backwardconnectionsinthe corticalhierarchyto‘explain’input from lower areas.
Top-downpredictionswouldbegeneratedusingastatistical (generative)model that
might itself be learned by exposure to training sensory data. Although this statistical
model consists of sets of assumptions about what in the environment could have
causedthestreamofdataimpingingonoursensorysurfaces, Clarkemphasisesthat
themodelisnotsomuchinthebusinessofaccuratelyrepresentingtheenvironment.
Instead, brains’ generative model attends to the business of control and regulation
(cf., Conan and Ashby 1970).
Learning would occur when the actually observed sensory data differs from the
predicted data, resultinginapredictionerror, broadcastedbyforwardconnectionsin
the cortical hierarchy for the immediate selection of action or for synaptic changes
underlying prediction update. Only expected features of an input signal are
suppressed, and only unexpected features are fed forward to tune the generative
model to reduce discrepancies between predicted and actual sensory signals.
While this functional asymmetry between prediction and prediction error signals is
on-off’scentralcommitments, italsoidentifiespredictionerrorminimizationas
cognitive bedrock, as a fundamental functional principle of biological brains.
In Chapter 2, Clark adds to this picture the notion of precision. Defined as the
reciprocal of the variance of a probability distribution, the precision of an error
signalwouldmodulatetheamplitudeofpredictionerrorsandconstituteattention. A
more precise prediction error will have more weight on updating the brain’s
123
Surfing Uncertainty:Prediction, Action,and the…
Generative model. Precision weighting on prediction errors would enable brains to
tipthebalancebetweensensoryinputandpriorexpectationsatdifferentspatialand
temporal levels in the processing hierarchy, in a way that is context- and task-
sensitive.
PrecisionweightingplaysanessentialroleinClark’argument, asitwouldallow
us to explain apparently different modes of perception, action, and reasoning by
appealing to a single kind of mechanism—more on this in a moment. As Clark
explains in Chapter 3, the same kind of precision-weighted multi-level prediction
machinery would also account for imagination, dreaming, and memory as cases
where top-down predictions run without meeting incoming sensory signals. And it
may ground semantic content too, which would derive from embodied brains’
predictions concerning how causal structure can be projected into observed data.
Where causal structure latches on to organism-salient patterns in the stream of
sensory data, we have a grip on the world, which would be revealed as inherently
meaningful.
Part II of Surfing Uncertainty includes Chapters 4–7, which are the philosophy-
icallyrichest. Thefocusisonaction, andtheclaimClarkputsforwardisthatPPis
the ideal explanatory partner for embodied theories of cognition. Relying on many
case studies and concepts from machine learning, computational neuroscience and
embodied cognitive science, Clark tries to work out how PP might reconfigure Trey-
ditionalpuzzlesaboutmind. Amongotherissues, heexploreswhetherthereisroom
for desire and reward in PP’s account of action (Chapter 4), how we grasp the
intentionsofothersbysimulatingthem (Chapter5), howweshouldunderstandthe
representations posited by PP (Chapter 6), and how PP explains emotion and
psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia and autism, and even helps us make
progress towards a solution to the hard problem’ of consciousness (Chapter 7).
Clark’s argument begins from the idea that embodied brains have two types of
strategiesofmatchingtheirpredictionstotheworldsoastocancelpredictionerrors.
Perception is the first strategy, where the brain finds the prediction that best
explains’ the sensory data. Action (or active inference) is the second, where the
brain actively samples proprioceptive data to fit its predictions. Forming a
continuous causal circle shaped by precision weighting, perception and action
would be synergy strategies brains use to match their predictions to the world.
Precision weighting would equip brains with a kind of mechanism to select
between knowledge-sparse and knowledge-rich modes of perception and action,
based on context and task. Using this mechanism, brains are best positioned to
deliver, whenever possible, cheap, action-involving solutions to the problems they
face. Because delivering these solutions often piggybacks on bodily and environ-mental structures, PP and embodied theorists can be friends. PP would in fact
constitute the ideal, empirically productive, neurocomputational framework for
studying the role of weighted prediction error and of top-down predictions in the
workings of embodied, situated brains.
Part III contains the last three chapters of Surfing Uncertainty. Appealing once
more to precision weighting, Clark argues (in Chapter 8) that human reasoning is
notsupportedbytwo(or more)functionallydistinctsystems. Labelslike‘System1’
and‘System2’, or‘model-free’and‘model-based’wouldnotpickoutnaturalkinds,
123
M. Colombo
but‘‘differentadmixturesofresourceandinfluence, eachofwhichisrecruitedinthe
same general way as circumstances dictate’’ (p. 256). Clark also touches upon the
relationship between extended cognition and PP, explaining that PP offers ‘‘a
specific, and highly extension-friendly,’ proposal concerning the shape of the
specifically neural contributiontocognitive success’’(p. 260). Chapter 8endswith
discussion of the ‘‘Darkened Room Puzzle,’’which is the worry that‘‘prediction-driven organisms ... should simply seek out states that are easily predicted, such as
an empty darkened room in which to spend the remainder of their increasingly
hungry, thirsty, and depressing days’’ (p. 262). To dissolve this puzzle, Clark
appeals to structurally implicit, innately specified expectations characteristic of us
humans, which may account for our drive towards play, exploration, and novelty.
Chapter 9 explains how social institutions, social norms, and language fit into PP.
Linguistically-empowered social norms and other human institutions would
function as prediction-error minimizing devices that we structure and re-structure
to support smooth interactions with others (cf., Colombo 2016). Chapter 10
concludes by flagging remaining ‘‘problems, puzzles, and pitfalls’’ for PP.
One potential problem that Clark does not address concerns the inductive basis
onwhichthecaseforPPisbuilt. SurfingUncertaintyrepeatedlyemphasisesthatPP
may constitute a ‘‘truly fundamental and deeply unified science of the embodied
mind’’ (p. 297). PP is said to constitute the beginnings of this unified science
because it identifies one type of embodiment-friendly neurocomputational mechanism, which might be tokened at different spatial and temporal scales in the
nervous system, and which may ground functional explanations of many sets of
behaviouralandneuraldata. Clarkidentifiesthismechanismandprovidesevidence
foritsrealitybytappingawidevarietyofsources, mostprominently:KarlFriston’s
free-energy principle (cf., Frisson 2010), Bayesian cognitive science, and deep
learning approaches.
However, this inductive basis is not homogenous. Deep learning is aimed at
pattern recognition. This approach suggests that the primary task of mind is to
discover structured patterns in large data sets through many layers of feature
extraction. Bayesian approaches are instead aimed at model-building, where the
primary task of mind is to use causal models to understand and act in the world
(Lake et al. 2016). Furthermore, some of the elements of both deep learning and
Bayesian approaches do not seem to mesh with central commitments of PP. For
instance, biologically plausible deep learning algorithms discover structure in data
by using backpropagation, where—in contradiction to PP—errors are propagated
backwards. Finally, currentworksuggeststhatbrainsmightactuallyoptimizemany
diverse cost functions that would not be reducible to prediction error minimization
without explanatory loss (cf. Marble stone et al. 2016).
The potential problem then is that the paradigm cases and concepts on which
Clark builds thecaseforPPmaynotallexemplifythe same kind of mechanism. If
so, then PP will not deliver a global understanding of embodied brains. Evaluating
this worry obviously requires a close engagement with the primary literature. But
one might predict that, given the range and diversity of phenomena studied in
cognitive neuroscience, global understanding may well take the form of a
123
Surfing Uncertainty:Prediction, Action,and the…
‘Patchwork quilt’ of models and approaches, none of which enjoys explanatory
primacy.
By painting such a stunningly unified picture, Clark’s Surfing Uncertainty does,
however, agreatservicetophilosophersandcognitivescientists. WhetherornotPP
turns out to be a truly unifying, explanatory account of embodied brains, Clark
crystallizes many of the contentious issues and developments in computational
neuroscience, whilst developing the conceptual landscape for carrying out new
productive work. Surfing Uncertainty is essential reading for anybody interested in
mind, brain, and cognitive science.
References
Colombo, M. (2016). Social motivation in computational neuroscience. Or if brains are prediction
machines, thentheHumeantheoryofmotivationisfalse. InJ. Kiverstein(Ed.), Routledgehandbook
ofphilosophyofthesocialmind. NewYork:Routledge.
Conan, R.C., &Ashby, R.W.(1970). Everygoodregulatorofasystemmustbeamodelofthatsystem.
Internationaljournalofsystemsscience,1(2),89–97.
Frisson, K.(2010). Thefree-energyprinciple:aunifiedbraintheory? Naturereviewsneuroscience,11(2),
127–138.
Lake, B.M., Ullman, T.D., Tenenbaum,J.B., &Gershman, S.J.(2016). Buildingmachinesthatlearnand
thinklikepeople, arXivpreprintarXiv:1604.00289.
Marble stone, A., Wayne, G., & Wording, K. (2016). Towards an integration of deep learning and
neuroscience. FrontiersinComputationalNeuroscience,10,94.DOI:10.3389/fncom.2016.00094.
Mason, O. J., & Brady, F. (2009). The psychotomimetic effects of short-term sensory deprivation.
Journalofnervousandmentaldisease,197,783–785.DOI:10.1097/nmd.0b013e3181b9760b.
Megabit, L.B.,Maguire’D., Warde, A., Alterescu, K., Stickgold, R., &Pascual-Leone, A.(2004). Visual
hallucinationsduringprolongedblindfoldinginsightedsubjects. Journalofneuro-ophthalmology,
24(2),109–113.
123