Transcribed from: Paths to god _ living the Bhagavad Gita ( PDFDrive ).pdf
Method used: pdfplumber
==================================================

Copyright © 2004 by Ram Days
Foreword by Marlene Older
“Buddhist Mealtime” by Joseph Goldstein
“Mindfulness Meditation on Food” by Jack Cornfield
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Three Rivers Press, an imprint of the Crown
Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
THREE RIVERS PRESS and the Tugboat design are registered trademarks of
Random House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ram Days.
Paths to god: living the Bhagavad Gita / Ram Days.—1st ed.
1. Bhagavad-Gita—Criticism, interpretation, etc. 2. Yoga. I. Title.
BL1138.66. R345 2004
294.5’436—dc22 2004015183
www.randomhouse.com
ISBN: 978-0-30742142-5
v3.0_r2
Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Dedication
Praise
Acknowledgments
Foreword
Introduction
1 - Context and Conflict
2 - Karma and Reincarnation
3 - Karma Yoga
4 - Nana Yoga
5 - Brahman
6 - Sacrifice and Mantra
7 - Renunciation and Purification
8 - Devotion and the Guru
9 - Social Aspects of Sahara
10 - Dying
Conclusion
The Course Syllabus for The Yoga's of the Bhagavad Gita
A. KEEPING A JOURNAL
B. CONTEMPLATION
C. MEDITATION
D. THE WITNESS
E. GIVING AND RECEIVING
F. SILENCE
G. PAPAYA
H. HATH YOGA ASANA AND PANAMA
I. JAPAN YOGA
J. GOING TO CHURCH OR TEMPLE
K. KIRAN
L. SATAN COLLABORATION
M. PUPA TABLE
N. KARMA YOGA
The Supplemental Syllabus
A. VIPASSANA MEDITATION
B. MINDFULNESS MEDITATION ON FOOD
C. BUDDHIST MEALTIME MEDITATIONS
D. SATAN MEDITATION
E. HOW TO USE A MALE
F. THE CHAKRAS
G. THE YOGA OF PSYCHEDELICS
Notes
Glossary
Resources
About the Author
Books by Ram Days
To my gurus...
Praise for Paths to God
“Ram Days makes the Bhagavad Gita. . . Easily accessible and
practical in how we can touch the deep mystery and live a good life in
modern times.”
—Angeles Adrien, Ph.D.,
author of The Four-Fold Way
and Signs of Life
“What a blessing: Ram Days on the Bhagavad Gita. Who better to
lead the Western mind into the profound depths of this spiritual
classic. With wisdom, humor, and great compassion, Paths to God
illuminates the liberating power of the Rita—a rare gift in these
unsettled times.”
—Joseph Goldstein,
author of One Dharma: The
Emerging Western Buddhism
“Ram Days is the perfect person to relate the timeless wisdom of the
Bhagavad Gita to the real challenges, joys, and sorrows of our present
time. Through offering a wide variety of approaches to spiritual
happiness, Paths to God is one of the most inclusive and inviting
books available to us.”
—Sharon Salzburg,
author of Faith: Trusting Your Own
Deepest Experience
Acknowledgments
There are three women whose contributions have made this book
possible—the Three Graces: Jo Anne Vaughan, Rita (Lee) Brady, and
Parfait (Betty) O’Neill. Without the gifts of each of them, this book
could not have happened.
At many gatherings nowadays, there is what is called a “Keeper of
the Heart”—someone whose task it is to hold an open, loving space,
no matter what is going on around her. Jo Anne has been the Keeper
of the Heart for this book. In a thousand unsung ways, she has literally
loved this book into being.
Rita created both the glossary and the resources guide for this book,
starting from a shoebox full of random clippings and scribblings. Out
of her deep familiarity with spiritual literature, she has spun straw into
gold and created a spiritual storehouse full of all sorts of rich and tasty
treats.
Parfait, who was one of the students at Ram Days’s Europa
workshop, phoned to offer her help at a crucial moment, when the
transcription of the lectures was hopelessly stalled. Not only did she
transcribe some of the tapes, but she sent along a treasure of Europa
memorabilia, including some personal photos of the event and a copy
of the original syllabus, which we’d given up hope of finding. Parfait
died of cancer in 2001. Her gift lives on in this book.
In addition to Jo Anne, Rita, and Parfait, we also want to extend
thanks to the staff members of Naropa University for their
encouragement and cooperation, and special thanks to Richard
Chamberlain of Europa’s Development Office for somehow
managing to lay his hands on a copy of the original 1974 summer
schedule, which provided a wealth of information about the event.
Our thanks to Joseph Goldstein and to Jack Cornfield for generously
allowing us to use their food meditations in this book; their practices
added a fresh dimension to the workshop, and now to this book as
well. And thanks to Ramesh war Was for being our “eyes” at the
workshop, and for sharing some of the photographs he took there.
When, at the last moment, we found we needed to track down
sources for the many quotes that had been included in the Europa
lectures, a number of volunteers stepped forward to help with the task.
Our thanks to all of those who joined the treasure hunt: James Beans,
Carolyn Behave, Caroline Bloomfield, Denise Coates, Stefan Cohen,
Robin Collins, Aaron Crawford, Honda Gaylord, Deborah Hopping,
Linda Cleaner, Dale Martin, Bobbie Aims, Ralf Brute, Kathleen
Murphy, Linda Nicholas, Sharon and Larry Roll, George T. Sergio
Jr., and Paul Wilson.
And, of course, most of all, thanks to Need Karol Baba, for
gracing us all with parts in this dance. I jay!
BACKWARD AND FOREWORD Or. . . Where This
Book Came from, and How It Might Be Used
This book has a curious history. It grew out of a workshop called “The
Yoga's of the Bhagavad Gita” that Ram Days taught in the summer of
1974. He presented the workshop as part of the curriculum for a
summer session at the newly established Europa Institute (now
Naropa University) in Boulder, Colorado.
Europa was founded by Program Trunk Roche, a Tibetan
Talk and Narayana master. Trunk was trained in the philosophical
and meditative traditions of two branches of Tibetan Buddhism—the
Kyrgyz and Cinema sects—and he was one of the first teachers to
begin introducing Tibetan practices to the West.
Europa’s aim was to explore the teachings of Eastern religious
traditions within a rigorous, Western academic environment. The
program for the summer session announced, “The purpose of Europa
Institute is to provide an environment in which the Eastern and
Western intellectual traditions can interact and in which these
disciplines can be grounded in the personal experience and practice of
staff and students. All the staff members are involved in the
practice of some discipline related to psychological and spiritual
growth. It is this direct experience which can form the sound basis for
integrating the complementary intellectual and sensory-intuitive
approaches to living in the world.”
In other words, Europa set out to meet the Western academic
establishment on its own terms, to become an accredited, degree-granting institution of higher learning, but one that would offer
degrees in fields like “Buddhist Studies, Exploration of Self and
Society, and a cross-cultural, interdisciplinary combination of the
two.” Courses included “not only the more intellectual disciplines—
the humanities and the social and physical sciences—but also
meditation, sensory awareness, dance, t’ai ch’i Chuan, theater, art, and
music.” You could get credit toward a B.A. from Europa for taking
Ram Days’s workshop.
Ram Days supported the establishment of Europa because he was
interested in the experiment that such an institution represented. But
more than that, Ram Days honored the teachings and traditions of
Trunk Roche, and wanted to help them take root in the West.
And so, in June and July 1974, he joined the faculty for the summer
session that would inaugurate Europa.
That summer at Europa brought together an outstanding cast of
teachers. Besides Ram Days and Trunk Roche, the faculty
included Allen Ginsberg, Gregory Bateson, José Arguello, Jack
Cornfield, Ben Weaver, and some two dozen others. Ram Days’s own
staff of teaching assistants included Krishna Was, Joseph Goldstein,
Ramesh war Was, Mirabeau Bush, Paul Gorman, and Ram Dev. Mirabeau
called that summer at Europa “the seedpod” for the teachings that
would shape the growing presence of Eastern spirituality in the West.
There were courses in Tibetan and Theravada Buddhism, in the
Sanskrit and Mongolian languages, in Tactic literature and Japanese
art—even in artificial intelligence (which was distinctly cutting edge
in 1974!). One of the participants called that summer at Europa “the
Hindu-Buddhist Woodstock.”
And in the program for the summer session, under the heading
“Modes of Self-Exploration,” was listed Ram Days’s course, “The
Yoga's of the Bhagavad Gita.” The course description read: “The
Bhagavad Gita (The Song of God) is both one of the most sacred
books in India and also one of the most profound statements of yoga.
In the West many of us find that karma yoga is the most suitable
practice, and the Bhagavad Gita is unparalleled as a statement of this
form, i.e., the yoga of conscious service. Through reflection on the
text and the many commentaries (Krishna Poem, Gandhi, etc.), we can
evolve a perceptual framework which allows us to transmute daily life
experience into a vehicle for liberation.”
Ram Days’s workshop was held in a building on Pearl Street in
downtown Boulder. Photos and videos show a plain, whitewashed,
cement-block building. There was a big stage, Ram Days recalls, to
accommodate the many musicians who took part in the program at
1
one time or another (including K. K. SAH, an extraordinary Kiran
singer, who came from India for the workshop).
Europa essentially offered Ram Days free rein as to the topic for his
workshop; so why did he choose to teach about the Rita? Ram Days
says, “Maharajah was always giving away copies of two books:The
Ramayana and the Bhagavad Gita. Since those were the books he
seemed to think were most important, I felt it behooved me to learn as
much as I could about them. Through being around Maharajah and
spending so much time at his temples, I felt I had absorbed at least
some understanding of the Ramayana. Teaching this course at Europa
seemed like an opportunity to plumb more deeply into the other book,
the Rita.”
Ram Days had a second motive for focusing on the Rita, as the
course description suggests, and that was his appreciation for its
unique appropriateness to our own cultural circumstances. The
philosophy of the Rita is one that turns out to be especially suitable
for us in the West, because instead of encouraging us to turn away
from the world, it turns our lives in the world into our spiritual work.
We don’t have much room in our society for wandering mendicant
monks, or many caves where sadhus can hang out. We’re a culture of
“doers,” and so, as the course description pointed out, “Many of us
find that karma yoga is the most suitable practice.”
Ram Days prepared intensively for the seminar. He had an old
2
school bus, which he’d outfitted as a camper, and he spent the two
months before the workshop living alone, out in the desert, immersing
himself in the Rita. He spent his time reading the Rita, meditating on
the Rita, studying commentaries on the Rita. He had with him some
half dozen or so different translations of the Rita, and he read and
reread them all. He typed out the text of the Rita, with big spaces
between each of the verses, where he wrote comments about the
slogan. He stayed at Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument in
Arizona for a while, and then at Joshua Tree National Park in
California; he said, “I gave the first version of the Rita lectures to the
jackrabbits that were hanging around the bus.”
At Europa, Ram Days’s class alternated evenings with a class called
“The Tibetan Buddhist Path,” taught by Trunk Roche. Although
Ram Days and Roche deeply respected one another, their teachings
were widely divergent in style and approach. Trunk’s teachings
were rooted in his lineage, and they followed a traditional Buddhist
intellectual approach, with exact categories and precise definitions.
Ram Days’s teachings were devotional, rooted in the intuitive and less
tightly structured. Ram Days said, “Trunk was teaching about
meditation and emptiness, and I was teaching about devotion and the
guru. The students felt like they were at a tennis match!”
There were over a thousand registered students in Ram Days’s
workshop. Although students were supposed to register for one course
or the other, there were many “crossover” students who came to Ram
Days’s workshop and vice versa; and while most of them came simply
to hear what Ram Days had to say, some were Trunk partisans who
came to needle Ram Days. Ram Days remarked at one point that he
had received “lots of letters from you, with many qualitative
judgments about me.”
There were no ill feelings between the two teachers; in fact, at the
end of the summer Trunk offered Ram Days a place on the Europa
faculty. Trunk said that that kind of diversity was good for the
students. But the students themselves were more factional in their
feelings; the conflicts came to be known around Europa as “the Holy
Wars.”
In an interesting way, those circumstances turned out to be uniquely
fortunate for Ram Days’s workshop. Ramesh war Was wrote, “The
confluence of Buddhism, Hinduism and America in Boulder that
summer was chaotic but profoundly unifying. Trunk and Ram Days
teasing each other on stage provided great humor and lightness, and
the contrast between Buddhist clarity of intellect and the Shakti heart
has never been better illumined.” The situation imposed a more
rigorous standard of expression on Ram Days’s teaching. If preparing
for the workshop deepened Ram Days’s understanding of the Rita,
teaching the workshop honed his formulation of that understanding.
In teaching about the Rita, Ram Days was exploring one of the
most significant and influential books in Indian culture. Mahatma
Gandhi wrote of the Rita, “When doubts haunt me, when
disappointments stare me in the face and I see no ray of hope on the
horizon, I turn to the Bhagavad Gita and find a verse to comfort me,
and I immediately begin to smile in the midst of overwhelming
sorrow. Those who meditate on the Rita will derive fresh joy and new
meaning from it every day.”
The influence of the Rita has not been limited to India; it has
touched the West as well. Henry David Thoreau said that in
comparison with the Rita, “our modern world and its literature seem
puny and trivial.” Ralph Waldo Emerson called it “the first of books.
. . The voice of an old intelligence.”
It is believed that the Bhagavad Gita was written sometime during
the first millennium B.C., and later inserted into a much vaster and
probably much older work, the Mahabharata. The Mahabharata is not,
strictly speaking, Hindu scripture (as are the Vedas and the
Upanishads), but one of some twenty Indian epics, called the Purana's.
The Purana's contain the stories of the lives of the various incarnations
or living manifestations of God: there is the Brahma Purana, and the
Garuda Purana, and the Linda Purana, and so on. And among those
are the two so-called Maharanis, or Great Purana's: they are the
Mahabharata and the Ramayana. The two Maharanis are woven so
deeply into the culture, life, and thought of India that one pundit said,
“The Mahabharata and the Ramayana are India.”
In the middle of that great tale of the Mahabharata we find the
Bhagavad Gita, said to contain “the essence of Hinduism.”
Historically speaking, the Rita did, in fact, represent Hinduism’s
response to certain Buddhist ideas that were exerting increasing
influence on Indian thought at the time. The Rita specifically
addressed the Buddhist emphasis on disengagement from the world as
the primary path to God. In place of that, the Rita offered a practice of
action in the world as a method for coming into unity.
The Rita is at once an instruction manual for living a spiritual life
and a profound, ecstatic vision of the ultimate nature of God. There
are many beautiful English versions of the Rita, but the one chosen
for the Europa workshop was the translation by Juan Mascara. Ram
Days said, “I picked the Mascara text because it’s delightfully easy to
work with. It is, in some ways, wanting in its profundity of
interpretation, its sophistication from a Sanskrit point of view; but it
doesn’t seem to have as many axes to grind as some of the other
translations do. And I confess: I also chose it because it was the one
that happened to be available in the temple where I lived in India in
1969, and so it was my first introduction to the Bhagavad Gita. And
you know how you always get hooked on your first love!”
Although Ram Days’s lectures at Europa (and by extension, this
book) were based on the Rita, it would be a mistake to think that they
were about the Rita in the usual sense. What Ram Days offered at
Europa was not a scholarly exegesis on the Rita, or an analysis of its
text, but a series of riffs on the Rita’s major topics. The themes of the
Rita were the launching pad for what turned out to be Ram Days’s
quintessential teaching on applied Hinduism. His premise is that the
Rita outlines a series of practices that taken together comprise a
complete yoga for living our lives as a spiritual act. Ram Days’s
accomplishment in the workshop was to shape those practices into a
form that we as Westerners could understand and adopt.
This book is derived from transcriptions of the lectures Ram Days
gave at Europa. It is both historical document and perennial
philosophy. The workshop was a unique blend of metaphysics and
methods, and so this book is also a rich weave of philosophy and
practice. Ram Days presents a vision of where we’re going, and he
also teaches us about the path for getting there.
Ram Days’s lectures were only part of the participants’ experience
of the workshop. Each student received a copy of a syllabus, which
presented a series of experiential exercises, through which the
participants could begin “bringing the Rita back home,” so to speak.
The introduction to the syllabus stated, “In addition to the lectures,
this course includes a number of exercises designed to provide
experiences which can evolve into a complete Sahara (a program of
spiritual practices), based on the Rita.” Participants set up pupa tables
in their rooms; they made their own males and chanted with them.
They took silent meditative walks, and they practiced hath yoga
Asana. There were eating meditations, and journal-writing exercises,
and all-night chants. And every afternoon there were discussion
circles, led by Ram Days’s staff of teaching assistants. In short, what
the workshop provided was the opportunity and the encouragement to
focus intensively for a time on cultivating the spiritual side of things;
it provided a space to plunge deeply into spiritual practice.
Emerging as it did from the workshop, which was a participatory
experience, this book presents you with a choice. The first possibility
is to take it simply as a book to read. Great!—you’ll find it’s a
wonderful book. It’s Ram Days’s most profound teaching on the
nature and practice of Hinduism, and his insights and observations
will deepen your understanding of the Rita and its message.
But you’ll find there is another option available. You can engage
with this book in a way that makes it personal. You can take it to be a
kind of do-it-yourself workshop; it can be a path to enter, a way of
coming into a new relationship with your life. Taken that way, you’ll
discover that the book presents you with a delicious array of
opportunities, with descriptions of practices, and little samplers of
various techniques. Should you find yourself drawn to one or another
of the methods, there is a wealth of resources to help you get started?
The syllabus from the workshop is one such resource. There is also a
supplementary syllabus, comprised of some instructions and examples
of practices presented during the workshop. The resources guide will
lead you to books, CDs, tapes, videos, and websites. It’s a rich
offering.
So what started life as a series of lectures given to a family of
jackrabbits in the California desert has morphed into the book that you
are holding in your hands. It’s a book that represents Ram Days’s
deepest wisdom about one of India’s most profound spiritual texts. It
shows us the way those of us here, in this contemporary Western
culture, can translate the yoga taught by the Bhagavad Gita into a
living spiritual practice of our own.
Marlene Older, editor
Offer in thy heart all thy works to me,
and see me as the End of thy love,
take refuge in the Yoga of reason,
and ever rest thy soul in me.
Bhagavad Gita, ch.18, verse 57
Ram Days’s Lecture Notes: A portion of Ram Days’s handwritten
notes, with an overview of some of the themes of the course.
Introduction
This is a book that is based on a course about an ancient Hindu text,
which was taught at a Buddhist university, by a Jew who has a great
love for Christ and Muhammad—so you can imagine what you’re in
for!
When I say this is “about an ancient Hindu text,” I don’t want to
mislead you. This isn’t really a book “about” the Bhagavad Gita. It
isn’t an analysis of the Rita, or a commentary on the Rita, or anything
like that. Rather, it’s a series of reflections about the major themes of
the Rita—themes that touch on the various yoga, or paths for coming
to union with God, that the Rita investigates. It’s an attempt to look at
how those yoga might be relevant to our own lives, in this day and
age.
The Buddhist part of the equation, Europa, was an institution
founded by Trunk Roche, a talk of a Tibetan Buddhist lineage.
But it was an institution concerned as much with the development of
the intellect as with its Buddhist lineage, with scholarship as much as
with tradition. And that presented me with a number of interesting
challenges, because my course on the Rita was primarily concerned
with issues of the heart—with the devotional and karmic-yogic
aspects of life. Mine was not “the thinking man’s” course.
I should point out that I’m not anti-intellectual. I think the intellect
is a beautiful instrument that can be used very productively, when one
isn’t attached to the idea that thinking is what it’s all about. But we are
coming out of a kind of sickness here in the West, a sickness in the
way in which we have overthought, the way in which we have been
intellectually way ahead of our hearts’ and our bodies’ wisdom. We’re
just now learning how to quiet down a bit, and get it all together,
which means that people who are trying to work with the intellect as
their primary yoga are dealing with a very hot fire. I honor them, but it
isn’t my own major path.
Besides feeling a little intellectually out of place, I had some other
qualms about my plans for the course. In talking with Swami
Muktananda (a very beautiful holy man from India) just before I went
to Europa to teach that summer, I expressed to him my feeling of
presumptuousness at attempting to teach about the Rita. What could I
possibly have to say about it? Most people in India probably know
more about it than I do. In India, many ordinary people are great
scholars, really, who have made extensive studies of the Rita. Often in
India I’ve gotten into long, philosophical discussions about the Rita
with a railway conductor, or a sweeper—people who, when they’ve
finished with whatever job they do for a living each day, do their
important work, which is studying spiritual books like the Rita or the
Ramayana.
So I was telling Swami Muktananda that I thought I was being a
little presumptuous in imagining that I had anything to teach about the
Rita, and in response, he told me this story.
Krishna, at one stage of his incarnation as an avatar, was a beautiful, young boy
(something you’ll need to know to understand this tale). Now there was a great
student of the Rita, an old man. He was so intent on studying the Rita that he
had stopped doing all of his work; he wouldn’t do anything but read the Rita all
day long. Soon he and his wife were without food. His wife was very harsh with
him, saying, “You have a duty to go out and bring food home for the family.”
She kept pressing him, making his life very difficult, but he’d just go off into the
woods and study the Rita every day.
One day, as he sat in the woods studying the Rita, the old man came across a
line in the book in which Krishna said, “If you offer all of your devotion to me,
you need to worry about nothing in the world. It will all be taken care of.” And the
man thought, “Well isn’t that a peculiar line? I mean, here I am, totally devoted
to the Rita, to Krishna, but my wife and I have no food, and she’s all upset with
me. It says right here that if I am devoted to the Rita, everything will be taken
care of. Why isn’t everything being taken care of? Could there possibly be
something wrong with the Rita?” At that point he took his pen and drew a line
through that sentence, because he wasn’t sure about it.
Now at that moment, back at his house, there was a knock at the door. The
wife went to the door and there stood a handsome young man, with bags of rice
and of lentils and of flour—huge bags, a supply to last for many months.
The wife said, “Who are you? What is all this?”
The young man said, “This is for the family of somebody who studies the
Rita.”
As the young man started to carry the bags of food into the house, the wife
noticed that his shirt was open, and that there was a wound on his chest, with
blood oozing out of the wound. She said to him, “What happened? Who did this
to you?”
He said, “This was done to me by a man studying the Rita out in the woods.”
He said no more, put down the bags of food, and left.
When the husband came back home and saw all the food, he asked his wife
about it. She said, “You know, the most peculiar thing happened.” She
proceeded to tell him about the young man’s visit, and she said, “When I looked
at him, I saw there was blood coming out of a wound on his chest. And when I
asked him how it had happened, he said it had been done by a man studying the
Rita out in the woods.”
At that point, Swami Muktananda told me, the old man realized
what had happened, and he fainted. Because he saw that when he had
underlined the book out of his sense of doubt, he had wounded the
body of Krishna. Swami Muktananda said, “You see, you have to
understand:The Rita isn’t a book about Krishna—the Rita is
Krishna.” And then he said to me, “You don’t have to worry about
teaching the Rita—that’s none of your business. The Rita will teach
itself. Krishna will do it in spite of you.” So I felt I was taken off the
hook by Swami Muktananda.
One important reason why I agreed to teach at Europa that summer
was because I wanted to honor its founder, Program Trunk
Roche, and the lineage he represented. Once we here in the West
began to turn our attention to consciousness and the spirit, we
discovered that there were traditions that had been concerning
themselves with those questions for a long, long time. Trunk
represented one of those exquisitely pure traditions or lineages.
Ram Days and Program Trunk: Program, the Tibetan founder of
Europa and a graduate of Oxford, and Ram Days, the Harvard social
scientist, would hold colloquial in the afternoons and debate the fine
points of Shakti, or devotional practice, versus Tibetan Mahayana
Buddhism. It was a very playful exchange, but behind the laughter
both shared a deep understanding of dharma and an appreciation for
one another’s spiritual paths.
We in the West seem to have become very reactive toward
traditional religious forms, which I think comes from the way we’ve
seen rituals and ceremonies used as ends in themselves—as a
mechanical, ritualistic priest craft, with the living spirit gone out of it.
That has certainly happened in the East, and it’s happened in Western
religions as well.
A lot of us now have come through a time of throwing over one
tradition after another. In this culture, we’ve thrown over sexual
traditions; we’ve thrown over traditional social relations concerning
marriage and the family; we’ve thrown over traditions about
economics and working conditions; we’ve overthrown all kinds of
political traditions. In most cases, that’s come out of a healthy
awakening to the deafness of the existing structures. But somehow
we’ve gotten a little lost in thinking that traditions per se are bad,
when maybe what’s needed is not to throw them away, but to
reawaken them. I think that one of our challenges now is to become
sophisticated enough not to throw out the baby with the bathwater.
I have gone to a lot of traditional religious ceremonies in both the
East and the West. You go into a church or a temple, and often what
you see is that everybody’s going through the motions: they go
through the ritual as if they were checking off their shopping lists at
the supermarket. They may be singing wonderful songs about
resurrection and rebirth, but nothing’s happening. The ceremony and
the ritual originally came out of living spirit, but that’s gotten lost in
the shuffle, and what’s left is just the mechanical stuff.
But now if I come back to it with eyes that are tuned to other planes
of consciousness, and if I can center and not get lost in my old
reactions to the situation, suddenly there it all is: Living Spirit again. I
think that we are all being prepared—all of us—to serve in that
capacity of reinvesting our society with Living Spirit. And that
happens through our becoming Living Spirit—because the only thing
you really transmit to another person is your Being. The fancy words
don’t mean a thing.
In that awakening process we’re all going through, there are various
stages, levels in the evolution of consciousness, and some of those
stages are characterized in the Rita, as we trace Arjuna’s awakening
through the eighteen chapters of the book. First there’s despair, then
there’s possibility, then there’s the beginning of awakening. Then
comes the opening of the mystic vision, and the deepening of the
direct experience—that’s in chapters 7 through 12. Then comes the
last part, which happens when the faith is strong: there’s an opening to
the deeper wisdom. That’s the way the phases of the journey are
spelled out in the Rita.
We represent among us many different levels of consciousness. It’s
not a matter of better or worse, we’re just at various stages of the trip.
Some of us are just beginning to feel the first touch of unease, a little
discomfort with the way the game’s been going. And at the other end
of the scale, some of us are so drunk with the bliss of mystic visions
that it’s all we can do to stay here and not go running off to a cave!
As we move through levels of consciousness, we find that our
understanding about the nature of our lives changes. Just to get the
flavor of the transformation, let’s listen to the statements of some of
the beings who have gone the whole journey. For example, this is
Jakob Böhme, the Christian mystic, speaking: “The external world, or
the external life, is not a valley of suffering for those who enjoy it, but
only for those who know of a higher life. The animal enjoys animal
life, the intellect the intellectual realm. But he who has entered into
regeneration recognizes his terrestrial existence as a burden and a
1
prison.”
Air said: “Dancing is not for me anymore. The mind no longer
plays the tune. The vessel of desire is broken, the gown of desire has
become frayed. Parts enough have I played; I can act no more. Friends
and companions have all forsaken me. God’s name alone I now have.”
2
And Thomas Merton: “The lightning flashes from east to west,
illuminating the whole horizon and striking where it pleases, and at
the same instant, the instant liberty of God flashes in the depths of a
man’s soul, and he is illumined. At that moment he sees that, though
he seems to be in the middle of his journey, he has already arrived at
the end. Although he is a traveler in time, he has opened his eyes for a
3
moment in eternity.”
Each of those is a statement of the possibility inherent in human
consciousness. And while some of them may be spoken in ways that
are difficult for us to hear just now, perhaps in the course of exploring
the Rita we will start to have a new perspective on things. We may
notice that our primary identification is no longer with the plane of
reality that we started out with; we may notice that we are already
participants in another realm or plane of consciousness, which has
become more real to us than the one we left behind. (This new realm,
too, will turn out to be an illusion, of course. . . But that will come to
its own due time.)
As we start to reperceive the nature of our lives through a book like
the Rita, it gets harder to play out some of our old social roles. I
remember when that began to happen for me: It was back at Harvard
in the early sixties. Tim Leary and I were doing research on
psychedelics under the umbrella of the university, and Harvard was
getting a little concerned, because we had just ordered half a million
dollars’ worth of LSD from Switzerland. So the university set up a
“watchdog committee.” It was unheard of for faculty members to
watch over each other, but Harvard was getting pretty desperate. I was
on that committee, actually, and we couldn’t agree on anything;
finally, some of the members took things in their own hands, and
arranged a public meeting to put down our work. The thrust of the
meeting was that we were not being “scientific”—mainly, they said,
because we were ingesting the chemicals ourselves, and how could
you be a “scientist” when you were changing your perceptual
viewpoint in the midst of your observations?
Now there is, in fact, a very rich tradition in psychology called
“introspectionism,” which deals with inner experience, but it was held
in very low repute in those days because of the takeover of
psychology by the behaviorists. Behaviorism had embraced physics as
its model for the study of the human mind, and so it rejected anything
that could not be seen from the outside. Our interest in presenting the
things that were happening inside of us as the data in our experiments
flew in the face of all that behaviorist theory.
At the meeting, Timothy took the stand and said, “You’re wrong— I
am a scientist. You people just don’t understand what real science is.”
He argued that they were persecuting scientific inquiry because of
their own preconceptions.
Now, Timothy happens to have been a darned good philosopher of
science, and I think he had a very good argument, but it wasn’t quite
the same as mine. The most powerful things that had ever happened to
me were happening to me through our Saturday night sessions with
psychedelics, and somehow that was more real to me than what I was
teaching on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. I was not sure, though,
that I could make the point about our scientific methodology, so I took
a stance very different from Timothy’s. I said, “Ladies and gentlemen,
you’re absolutely right. I am no longer a scientist. Furthermore, I’m turning in my
badge. From now on, I should be considered a ‘datum.’ I’m the data,
and you may study me, to see what happened to him who ‘did that in
the sixties.’ You can be the scientists; you can have that role. I give it
up. I really don’t want it anymore.”
Why didn’t I want it? Because I’d discovered it’s a drag. If I adopt
that role, I’ve got to sit in intellectual judgment on everything that
comes to me. I’ve got to say, “Will I accept this? What is its statistical
likelihood? What is the probability of its recurrence?” I’ve got to live
inside a probabilistic model, and sit with a skeptical stance of doubt.
I had realized I didn’t want to do that anymore. Furthermore, I wanted to be at the
place where, later on, when I sat in a village in India, and heard
people tell me miracle stories that would set off the doubt alarms in all
my Western scientific friends, I could say, “Yeah! Of course! Far
out!”—and mean it! I had realized I’d rather cultivate faith than
skepticism. It was a new definition of who I am.
Now, we have been talking about this whole process as a
transformation, as an evolution of consciousness. But maybe it’s less a
matter of evolving or changing, than of simply acknowledging who
we already are. The way I see it is that there are states of
consciousness that are always available to us if we have not veiled
ourselves from them through our attachment to our own thoughts. All
of it is always available to all of us—but whether we know that or not
(or, better, the degree to which we know it) depends on who we think
we are. What the Rita does, then, is to present us with a template for
expanding our definitions of who we are, and therefore for
appreciating our lives in a whole new context.
P. D. Suspense said an interesting thing—he said: “I found that
the chief difficulty for most people was to realize they really heard
new things—that is, things that they had never heard before. They
kept translating what they heard into their habitual language. They
4
had ceased to hope and believe that there might be anything new.”
He’s reminding us of how hard it is to open to something new without
immediately labeling it in terms of our old formulas, our old
attachments.
I’d like to encourage you to come to our exploration of the Rita
being open to the possibility of hearing something new—that is, being
open to a new perspective, to a new understanding of how we might
perceive and live our lives. The Rita is Krishna, remember, and
Krishna is a manifestation of our own inner being, so opening to the
study of the Rita will open us, in a profound way, to our own deeper
selves.
In what I’m going to be saying now, I’ll have to assume that you’re
familiar with the Bhagavad Gita, at least in a general way. If you
haven’t read it yet, I encourage you to do so; it will only take you
about three or four hours. I would suggest that you read it through that
first time just as a very interesting story: Who is Krishna? Who is
Arjuna? And how do they find themselves in this peculiar
predicament, sitting in a chariot, out on a battlefield?
I would further suggest that you plan to read the Rita twice more. I
would suggest that you read it again after we have finished our
discussion in chapter 1 about the basic conflict in which Arjuna finds
himself, and after you have personalized that conflict sufficiently to understand what his predicament is. I suggest you read it that
time identifying with Arjuna; that is, once you have figured out what
your own conflict is, your own spiritual struggle, then use that as the
framework, and listen to Krishna telling you how it all is regarding
your own battleground.
Then, when you are ready, may I suggest a third reading of the
Rita, in which you read it identifying with Krishna. Because that, in
fact, is also who you truly are.
Now, that last reading may raise some interesting problems for you.
If you are Krishna, then you are the Rita. Maybe you’ll be reading
along, and you’ll come to a line, and you’ll think to yourself, “I would
never say that!” But the fact is, the Rita does say that, and we’re
supposed to be taking Krishna’s perspective. What to do?
This is where your spiritual exercises come in, like the ones we’ll
be talking about or the ones in the syllabus. For instance, you might
work with your perplexities through a practice like contemplation:You
sit down in front of your pupa table or in any quiet space; you take
both the line as it’s written and the line as you think it ought to be, and
you sit with both those thoughts. The process will show you exactly
where you’re hanging on. You’ll think, “I never would have said
that!” Ah!— there it is. That’s the one! Who is the “I” who would
never have said that? Where is the clinging? Those are the lines that
will turn out to be the richest ones for you, because they will show
you where you’re holding on, where your secret stash of attachment
lies.
Implicit in the suggestion that you use an exercise like
contemplation to go deeper with your third reading of the Rita is a
more general thought about the way you might want to approach this
exploration. Since this book emerged within the context of a
workshop, it includes suggestions for practices, like the contemplation
exercise we just talked about. The practices offer an opportunity to
expand your experience outside the covers of a book, and to engage
with the material in a deeper way. The practices can profoundly enrich
your appreciation of the way the Rita’s teachings work.
Here’s another example: journal keeping. Since going through this
experience will, in a way, be like going on a journey of exploration,
you might want to consider keeping a journal as you make your way
through this book. When you travel, don’t you keep little journals of
all the far-out things that happen to you? Writing about those things
can be useful, in showing you transformations that might otherwise
slide by or be forgotten. Something that puzzles you this week may
seem crystal clear a few weeks from now, and that’s interesting to
notice. Or something that happens through your reading disconfirms
some cherished belief system; if you don’t write it down, you might
selectively forget it, in order to keep your ego-sense consistent. That’s
why journals and diaries can be very useful devices.
(Maharajah, my guru, always kept a diary. Every day he would close
himself up in his room and write two pages in his diary. Now, you
might wonder, “What would a guru’s diary be like? What would he
write in it?” Would it be “I saw this many people today. . . . I gave
them ‘the touch.’ . . . I spent the afternoon with Krishna and Rama and
Christ. . . . Christ is looking much better these days”? What would he
put in a diary? After Maharajah had left his body, we were finally
shown the diaries. For each day, there would be the date, and the
name of the place where Maharajah was staying; and then there would
be two pages where the major events of the day were written: “Ram,
Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram,
Ram, Ram. . .” —on and on, for two pages. The name of God was all
that seemed to have been relevant that day. And the next day. And the
next.)
If you decide to keep a journal, please start right away; you’ll find
it’s much more useful if you do it continuously, right from the outset.
You can use it to record your reflections about lines in the Rita, or
examples of the ways you personalize the teachings of the Rita
through your own experience. You can add quotes or pictures. Some
of the journals I’ve seen over the years are incredibly beautiful, filled
with artwork, with wonderful poetry, with all the stuff of our
ruminating minds.
So keeping a journal is one more way you might consider
deepening your participation in this journey. There will be more
suggestions as we go along, so you can jump into the whole process at
whatever level of involvement feels right for you. You can simply
read this book, and maybe find in it some thoughtful perspectives on the Rita and about Hinduism. Or you can personalize it, you can
use it differently: you can dive into it as a spiritual exercise,
with journals and pupa tables and contemplation practices and all the
Jeshua stuff. Those are all like the side trips on a tour, and you can
take as many or as few of the excursions as you’d like. It’s up to you
to decide what feels right for you at this moment.
As we read the Rita, we’ll notice that it is designed in a very
interesting way. Everything that really needs to be said is pretty much
said in the first two chapters. After that, it’s said over and over again,
but with more and more exquisiteness and with more and more detail.
The whole book becomes like a spiral, and we find that we see the
themes of the Rita from many different vantage points as it unfolds,
and as our engagement with it deepens.
This book will unfold in the same way, with ideas appearing again
and again in new contexts, and with methods and practices that
complement and build on one another. That whole process will keep
presenting us with new perspectives and new possibilities as we go
along, and each one will be an invitation to go a little deeper,
something coaxing us to awaken a little more.
And if this book really works, it will turn out that who you are at
the end of it won’t be quite the same you as the one who’s reading
these words right now.
Conclusion
This being the conclusion, custom calls for us to look back over the trip we’ve
been taking together, and to try and figure out where it is we’ve come with it all.
In service to that, it would seem appropriate for us to do a couple of things: The
first is to bring together the various strands of thought we have been following,
to tie up the loose ends so we can come to some feeling of closure about it all.
The other is to reflect on what all this might conceivably have had to do with the
Bhagavad Gita.
To take the last one first: I think we’ve found that the relationship between
this book and the Rita is a little more subtle than we may at first have
anticipated. Although this is supposed to be a book about the Rita, and although
it has come out of many, many years of reading and studying the Rita, a lot of it
hasn’t been directly connected to the Rita in any technical sense. It clearly
wasn’t a scholarly discourse on the text, for example. It wasn’t an interpretation
of its slogan. I think what would be most accurate is to say that this book is a
commentary on the foundation concepts on which the Rita is built, and a
reflection on some ways we can bring the Rita’s practices into our own spiritual
lives. Those are the aspects of the Rita that we have been exploring.
As for creating closure and bringing it all together, I suspect that that will
really have to wait until it happens, in its own time, in each of our hearts, as we
bring the teachings into the light of our own experiences. But although we
probably can’t tie it all together in a neat package, what we can do instead is to
trace the major threads that have run through this book.
Looking back, I think we can see that the underlying theme throughout all of
this has had to do with the way the Bhagavad Gita provides us with a map for
our own Sahara. The Rita sets out a system of practices, yoga, for bringing us
into union with Brahman, with the One. And when those practices work, as they
do in the case of Arjuna, then comes the Mystic Vision.
In the eleventh chapter of the Rita, we’re given a taste of what that vision is
like. Arjuna says to Krishna, “I have heard thy words of truth, but my soul is
yearning to see thy form as God of this all.” Then, because of the preparation
Arjuna has had, Krishna gives him “divine sight,” so he can see Krishna’s
cosmic form—which is Awful: full of awe. Arjuna sees the whole universe
there in front of him, all around him, with the radiance of a thousand suns—all creation coming and going in Krishna.
That vision totally blows Arjuna’s mind. He says, “I have seen what no man
has seen before. I rejoice in exultation—and yet my heart trembles with fear.
Have mercy upon me: show me again thine own human form.” The mystic
vision is too much for Arjuna’s mind to take in; he’s ready to go back to seeing
Krishna in his human form again. But as a result of that experience, any
remaining doubts Arjuna may have had are overridden, and he simply surrenders
into doing his dharma. From that point on, Krishna starts to give him instruction
in a much more direct way. The seduction is over, if you will.
Now the thing is when that experience comes to Arjuna, he’s already leading a
very saving life, a spiritually pure existence. All the non-killing, non-stealing,
non-lying, non-lusting, non-giving-and-receiving stuff is simply assumed in
Krishna’s dealings with Arjuna. The experience of the cosmic form comes after
all that is already a given, and after a certain amount of wisdom—higher wisdom
—has been developed in Arjuna through Krishna’s teachings.
Preparation for the mystic vision is important. You recall that we’ve talked
about the lower wisdom and the higher wisdom—that the lower wisdom is the
stuff your ordinary intellect can manipulate, conceive of, play with,
conceptualize, whereas the higher wisdom is the wisdom that comes to us only
through initiation. The higher wisdom comes only through direct experience;
you have to become it. And the Rita runs us through that whole process. The
Rita presents the lower wisdom in the first few chapters, then follows with the
purifications that are the groundwork for us to open to the higher wisdom, so
that through the higher wisdom we can arrive at the possibility of having certain
kinds of experiences which come with it—namely, the experiences that come to
Arjuna in chapter 11.
Now, what happened to many of us, through our use of psychedelics, was that
the sequence got inverted. We had the chapter 11 Experience before we’d read
chapters 1 through 10. We were left with a mind-blowing vision without any
structural understanding of it, or any degree of purification that would allow us
to receive it. That was part of what all the “bad tripping” was about. But though
sometimes in a fierce way, those visions ultimately did force us to go back and
seek the purification, seek the higher wisdom, so that the launching pad for our
mystical visions would start to be different. And so although the yoga that has
been emerging in the United States may not be sequencing in exactly the way the
Bhagavad Gita outlines, now that we have used the psychedelics, and blown
ourselves out of our totally externalizing/worldly/philosophical-materialist mind-set, we are ready to hear what we need to hear in order to get on with it, so we
can become the statement of the higher wisdom: a liberated being.
So we look to the Rita to tell us about all those practices we’re ready to start
doing. We do that, even though we know, as we said before, that in a way all
practices are a hype. We do it because we feel a need for practices, because we
feel intuitively drawn toward them. Something within us is simply nudging us.
We see the dilemma in that, because we know that all our dramas, including the
drama of “Getting Enlightened,” are just more veils, and that veils keep us from
seeing who we really are. So Getting Enlightened keeps us from getting
enlightened. But then that becomes the incentive for deepening our practices still
further, so they’re coming from a purer place, and the cycle continues. From one
level up, we see that the perfection includes our use of the methods. We realize
that there is nothing at all to do, but in a state of total openness to all the
possibilities in our lives, we’re drawn to work on ourselves.
When we’re ready to start doing practices, the Rita provides us with a
curriculum of all the various yoga we can begin to include in our lives. A yoga
is really any practice we undertake with the intention of coming closer to God.
The key to it is the “intentional practice” part and so yoga scan involve any and
all parts of our lives. Martin Barber said, “There is no human act that cannot be
hallowed into a path to God.”
But although the Rita offers us a number of different yoga to work with, it’s
clear that the one it’s mainly concerned with is the path of karma yoga. The Rita
was, you will recall, meant in part as Hinduism’s reply to Buddhism; it embraces
a spiritual path of engagement in the world rather than withdrawal from it.
I see the Rita as basically a karma yoga manual, a guidebook for bringing
spirit into action. I find the teachings of the Rita reflected in the lives of Gandhi
and Martin Luther King. The Rita is a path of yoga that’s designed for a life of
action rather than a life of contemplation, and it tells us how to carry on our
spiritual quest right in the midst of our lives in the world. It spells out the way
we can do that: by offering all our actions to God, by acting without any
attachment, and by acting without seeing ourselves as the actors.
Before we arrive at that place of pure, detached action, we will go through a
lot of other levels first, and each one will contribute its own little piece to our
Sahara. For instance, if we’re still acting from the feeling “I ought to do karma
yoga,” our actions will come tarnished with guilt and anger, and to that extent,
they aren’t “pure” karma yoga. However, that very impurity will become the
force that drives us to reflect more deeply about our actions; and then, as we do,
and as our wisdom gets clearer, our motivation will get purer, and our karma
yoga will change.
In earlier chapters, we talked about karma yoga and sacrifice as if they were
separate practices. But the fact is that the highest statement of karma yoga is also
a full expression of the act of sacrifice. In practicing true karma yoga, we
sacrifice ourselves and our gratifications into selfless, dharma action. The ritual
of sacrifice satisfies some deep yearning in us to complete a cycle, to offer back
for what we’ve been given. When Krishna agrees to come onto the physical
plane as an avatar, it is an act of sacrifice. Can you imagine, being God and
having to wear a people-suit? It’s itchy, and it doesn’t fit very well, and it’s so
constricting. But in order to reinstitute dharma on the physical plane, Krishna
manifests in form. That sacrifice has come down to us as an offering. Then, to
complete the circle, to close the ring, to make the whole thing sacred, we offer
our lives back up in sacrifice. The whole movement of the formless into form
into the formlessness becomes one huge “Omaha!”—one huge offering into the
fire of ongoing transformation.
If all that seems too romantic to you, then work with sacrificing what you do
every day to your higher consciousness. Sacrifice it all to your awakening—each
thing you do, all day long. If you’re driving a car, if you’re getting gas, if you’re
making the bed, if you’re brushing your teeth, if you’re going to the toilet—
whatever it is you’re doing, make it grist for the mill of your awakening.
Any act we perform can be looked at in a worldly way, or it can be looked at
from a different vantage point—a vantage point that redefines who we are and
what it is we’re doing here. Am I just “brushing my teeth”? Or am I “brushing
my teeth as a way of going to God”? It’s a choice, and that process of shifting
our vantage point is profound. It’s really a process of re-creating our perceptual
field, re-creating our entire universe, act by act.
We can turn any part of our lives into a sacrifice, into an offering. We can turn
our feelings into our sacrifice. If you’re having trouble with someone, make
them your practice. Add a picture of her or him to your altar. I take the people
I’m having a really fierce time with, and I stick their pictures on my pupa table.
Maharajah said to me, “Whatever else you do with another human being, never
put them out of your heart.” And so now there’s that being whom I’m angry with
there on my pupa table. I go to do my morning meditation; I look at the picture,
and my heart closes to him or her. So I sit there with that picture, I sit there with
that being, until I can let go of the anger, until I can reperceive that being, until I
am seeing her or him as God. I get as close to the fire of my feelings as I can—
and believe me, it gets hot!
Sacrifice and renunciation are kindred practices. Sacrifice, in a way, ritualizes
our acts of renunciation. There is a place for renunciation, papayas, or
austerities, in our spiritual practice. It’s useful to impose disciplines on
ourselves, when we feel that’s what we crave. If you crave it, it’s good to fast,
because it will let you see how attached you are to food. If you crave it, it’s good
to be brahmacharya, because you will see how captivated you are by your sexual
desires. Papayas let us bring into consciousness the full extent of our
attachments. If we can look at those attachments from the outside, from the place
of the witness, we won’t get quite so sucked in by our sense desires all the time.
If our minds aren’t always going outward so much, they’ll be free to turn inward,
back toward the Light.
That’s what austerities are about. When they make us feel joyful, because
we’re releasing ourselves from something that’s holding us back from God,
that’s a good indication that renunciation is the right practice at the moment. On
the other hand, if we’re gritting our teeth and doing it all in order to “be good,”
then maybe we should wait a while. When we start measuring “How much can I
give up?—that’s a pretty good indication that righteousness has crept in. “I’ve
given up sex, and I’ve given up meat, and I’ve given up milk, and I’ve given up. .
. ” What an ego trip that is! That’s just being attached to being nonattached, and
you haven’t even begun to renounce! The practice of renunciation is
ultimately about renouncing our SU firing over this or that, and when that
happens, the whole melodramatic part of the renunciation trip starts to fade
away. The game isn’t to see how little food we can eat, or how little sex we can
have, or how few clothes we can wear—that’s nonsense. The point of the game
is to be free: not attached to having, not attached to not having, but free.
Renunciation is a means to an end. Once we’re free, renunciation is irrelevant.
The minute we’re free of attachment, we can use or not use anything in the
universe. In fact, it all then becomes ours to use. All the energy of the universe is
free energy, and once we’re free, it’s all there for us to use. But that’s only after
we are without attachments, because only then can we be trusted with the keys to
the kingdom. When we are without desires, without attachments, we will act
only when we are drawn by our dharma to act. There will be nothing we’re
looking to get from the situation that would take us away from our doing our
karma yoga. Perfectly.
Although it doesn’t take center stage in the Rita the way karma yoga does,
Shakti yoga is central to the Rita’s message. In chapter 12, Krishna says that
Shakti is the highest form of yoga. He tells Arjuna, “Those who set their hearts
on me and ever in love worship me, these I hold as the best yogis.” Shakti yoga
and karma yoga are woven together. Krishna tells Arjuna that those who serve
him with love will be guided by him from within their hearts. It’s the goal of the
karma yogi to act out of pure dharma—that is, to have every action guided by
God’s will. And here Krishna is telling us that the way that’s accomplished is
simply by adding love to the equation.
So we add in the love, we engage in the Shakti practices, although at the same
moment we recognize that there is a danger of getting lost in the object of our
devotion and never moving past it. There is what we’ve called the lower Shakti
and the higher Shakti, and the lower Shakti can be very dualistic—it’s the
worship of somebody or something “out there.” Lower Shakti usually comes
with a kind of needful, clinging attachment. There’s nothing wrong with any of
that; it’s part of the way Shakti works. It’s fine, so long as we understand what
it’s about, and we keep developing our wisdom so we can move on.
I myself started out from a place of “lower Shakti,” feeling incredible love on
a very personal level for this being, Maharajah. Here was this guy who was
loving me, taking care of me, feeding me, clothing me, patting me on the head,
pulling my beard, and giving me great teachings. I had never been loved like that
before! My heart opened to him at a very romantic level; I just loved “Big
Daddy.” However, through that love I opened myself to him, and so every
teaching he was laying on me was just pouring straight into me, because my
heart was so wide open. And in the course of that wide-openness, the teachings
that came in from him kept redefining my existence and refining my
understanding until my attachment to him as a form—that personal level of love
for him—started to fall away, and something else came in its place. It became a
love for that which he was showing me, that which lay beyond his form. At that
point, my love for him had become the vehicle for my opening. That’s the way
the yoga of devotion does its work.
Chapter 9 of the Rita ends with Krishna telling Arjuna, Always think of me,
always love me. “Give me your mind and your heart, and you’ll come to me,” he
says. We can see a kind of daisy-chain of practices here: first karma yoga and
Shakti yoga are linked— Krishna guides via the heart, the actions of his
devotees. Now we see that Shakti yoga and Nana yoga are linked—to get to
God, we have to give over both our hearts and our minds. We need wisdom to
keep us from getting trapped in the lower Shakti; but the thinking mind needs to
be balanced by the Shakti heart. When that combination of Nana and Shakti
comes together, it’s powerful! The devotion gets clearer and clearer, and the
wisdom gets more and more subtle. The Shakti takes us through the emptiness,
and into a loving dharma.
Papa RAMDAC was a beautiful Indian holy man. He was born in 1884 and spent
most of his life in Mangalore, India, at an ashram he had there with Mother
Krishna. Papa RAMDAC said that since all human beings have bodies, hearts,
and intellects, they need to use all three in their spiritual development; otherwise,
he said, it’s like exercising one part of the body and ignoring all the rest. He said
that the body is to be used for selfless service (karma yoga); that the heart is to
be used for devotion (Shakti yoga); and that the mind is to be used for
discernment (Nana yoga). That is, each yoga is a technique that uses some
aspect of who we are, as human beings, in order to take us to a new perceptual
vantage point on our lives.
All Nana yoga practices are ways of turning the mind back on itself. Papa
RAMDAC wrote, “Man should use the intellect forVichara— i.e., he should
discriminate between the real and the unreal to give up attachment to the
unreal or perishable things of the world.” He’s telling us to switch our attention
from the unreal—which is what we usually call “reality”—to the real. Working
with a statement like that, with all its implications, with the writings and
teachings of holy beings like Papa RAMDAC: that’s one form of Nana yoga. Then
there are the forms of Nana in which we use the mind to beat the mind, practices
like Zen koans or Richard ATM. There are practices that focus the mind, like
meditation or mantra. And there are practices that let us take a step back from
the mind, like witnessing.
I think that the practice of witnessing can be a key spiritual exercise for us,
because it lets us move outside the dramas of our lives. It shows us that there
exists another plane from which to view our experiences. The danger of
confusion in this practice is mistaking the judging voice inside our own minds
for the spiritual witness. When we first begin to get some grasp of what the
dance is all about, and we start to stand back a bit from our own trips, we
frequently adopt a type of witnessing that is very judgmental. It’s got a standard
— you’ve got Buddha as your standard, or Christ as your standard, or Krishna as
your standard, or Maharajah as your standard—and next to that standard you’ve
got your own behavior and your own thoughts and your own feelings. You set
those two things side by side, and then judge your own behavior against the
standard. That’s an extension of what is known as the superego, and it’s a heavy
emotional trip that only tends to lock you more tightly into your predicament. It
certainly doesn’t do much to free you.
The witness that’s useful in our spiritual work has a totally different quality. It
isn’t judging—good, bad, it’s all the same. This witness isn’t trying to change
anything—it’s just seeing it all. It is the completely uncommitted; it’s not
committed to your enlightenment, it’s not trying to get you ahead, it’s simply
witnessing, nothing else.
As we move into that perspective, however, we discover that in developing
the witness, we sacrifice being the experience. That is, we sacrifice the thrill of
the experience into the witness. Anytime we want to, we can become that part of
ourselves that is the witness, which is just noticing it all, very calmly, very
unanimously. It just takes a flick of our perspective—in fact, just the intention
to be coming from that other place. That’s all. But to do that, we have to be
ready to let go of being the experience.
To develop that kind of witness, you have to have a little elbow room. That’s
why one of my first instructions for Sahara would be “Give yourself some
space.” Don’t always be filling up your time and your mind with content; create
a spacious environment for yourself, one that makes it easier to step back and
notice your trip.
Then do just that. Notice it. Don’t judge it, don’t try to change it, don’t do
anything at all except to notice it. You will find that a lot of your stuff has only
been able to survive unnoticed; the minute you begin to bring it into the light of
that “I” that is just looking at it all, it starts to change—without your ever having
done a thing! All you did was to start identifying with a different part of your
being, a part you could use to watch all the rest of it.
Say I’m sitting here, witnessing, and suddenly I move my hands. I’m
witnessing, so I notice the movement. Now, I can say to myself, “Why are you
moving your hands so much?” That’s judging. Or I can say to myself, “Well,
now that you’ve noticed that you’re moving your hands, you’ll stop.” That’s a
program. But behind judgments and programs, there is just witnessing: hands
moving, witness noticing, nothing more.
But even with this level of the witness, we’re still operating within a dualistic
framework: The witness is still witnessing something. Later on, there comes yet
another kind of witnessing, a kind of pervasive perception of everything, which
comes out of total nonattachment. When we come to that place, another
transformation occurs: Then we are still the witness, but we are also the enjoyed.
We are the experience, the experience, the total participant. There is no part of it
we are not. And that is the witness Krishna is referring to when he says, “I am
the Witness. I am the Knower of all the fields.” That’s not an ego witness; that’s
not a Nana-yogic exercise. That’s Brahman. The practice has transcended itself;
it has taken us to the place where we witness it all because we are it all, because
we have merged. It is the Oneness out of which the higher wisdom is born. It is
the “beyond the Beyond.”
So how does all of this add up? What does all of this mean in terms of our own
Sahara? We are all at different places in our journey. Some of us feel we’re
right at the beginning of something new. Some of us feel like we’ve fallen off
the path. Some of us are doing regular practices. Some of us don’t know what to
do next. For many of us, there is a lot of confusion about our Sahara: What
should I do? Am I doing it right? Is some other path better for me than this one
is?
In trying to figure out a way to approach our Sahara, there are a few
strategies that I would suggest we keep in mind—and the first and most
important one is Relax! It doesn’t really matter which next thing you do, because
whatever it is, it will become your next teaching. And it isn’t the thing you do
that matters, anyway—it’s who it is that’s doing it, where it’s coming from in
you. That means that all those choices and all those decisions that we agonize
over aren’t really quite so fraught and melodramatic as we like to make them out
to be.
The second part of my strategy has to do with learning to listen within. It’s
about learning to trust the inner, intuitive sense of what it is you are about at any
moment. Doing that may take you down some very unexpected avenues—in
fact, it probably already has. For example, I’ll bet that a large percentage of the
people who are attending meditation retreats and monastic retreats these days
wouldn’t even have entertained the possibility of such a thing a few years ago.
Can you imagine, wasting your vacation going someplace where you sit on a
pillow for sixteen hours a day? But then suddenly it feels right on. It feels like
the obvious next thing to do.
So instead of preprogramming how you think your spiritual journey is going
to unfold, it’s better to listen intuitively. That means you’re going to have to
keep being straight with yourself. Don’t be afraid to change when your intuitive
wisdom tells you to. You start a Sahara, and you go into it with total
commitment, and you drink deeply of it. But then you begin to experience its
limitations for you. At that point, the tendency is either to deny your intuitive
wisdom in order to stay on, or to start looking for things to criticize in the
method so you can justify exiting. However, I think that a more sophisticated
way of dealing with it is just to say, “I have no more work to do here right now.”
No judgments. It’s not that it isn’t beautiful, and it’s not that you aren’t beautiful
—it’s just saying, “We don’t have any more work together at this time.”
Now, you’re going to have to trust your own heart in all that, because you’re
not likely to get much support for your decision from either your teacher or your
fellow students. Your teacher is going to say, “You mustn’t leave. If you leave,
you’re going to fall into the pits of hell.” Don’t worry about it, scary though it
may be. You’ve got to keep trusting your intuitive heart. At some point, your
heart drew you to the teacher, and if you trusted your heart then, trust it now
when it says, “Go on.” There is nothing wrong, either, with leaving a teacher and
then coming back five years later and saying, “Well, I guess I made a mistake.”
Mistakes are an absolutely necessary part of the process.
Once you relax and trust your heart, you’ll find that you will be drawn by
exactly those forms and practices that are going to take you through. Work with
whatever it is that’s drawing you at the moment. At one moment, you’ll sit by
the river, and you’ll look at a rock, and you’ll feel its sacredness, and that will
take you out of yourself. At another moment, nature won’t do it for you, but
something else will. Sometimes it will be just a word about Christ that will do it;
your heart will open, and you will feel that spark of Spirit. Or there will come a
moment when the intellect will be so clear and precise that you will see the
whole panorama, the awesome nature of the design of it all, and that will take
you beyond thought. Each of those is a different moment. At one moment, one
form feels comfortable, right, useful; at another moment, another form. Just keep
flowing in and out of the forms. Use them and then drop them—the forms aren’t
“it.” The point isn’t to cling to one practice or another, one teacher or another;
the point is to use whatever can at this moment open you to living spirit.
If you have any doubts about whether you should be doing a practice, stop
doing it. If you have any misgivings about doing Sahara, if there is any
question in your mind as to why you are doing it, stop. Go back and live your
life just the way you lived it before you ever heard the word “Sahara,” before
you ever turned on, before you ever meditated or prayed, before you ever knew
anything about all of this nonsense. Go and live exactly as you did, and forget
this whole Jeshua business. And then watch what happens. Watch the way you
are drawn by some inner thread to open a spiritual book and read a few passages,
or to sit quietly and watch a candle flame.
If we can just quiet down all the ought and should in ourselves, if we can be
finished with that whole Protestant ethic trip we’ve been on, we will see that we
are really already further out than we give ourselves credit for being. We keep
thinking we have to get behind ourselves and push, when all the time we are
actually being propelled full speed ahead. When we see that, we recognize that
Sahara isn’t something we do to get ourselves somewhere; it’s something we
do to get ourselves out of the way, so we can stop being obstacles to the process.
When we try to quiet down and listen for what to do, we often find that there’s
a lot of emotional stuff standing in our way. We find that before we can get on
with it, we have to get rid of all our accumulated personality stuff, and cleaning
up our stuff means we first have to look at it. We all have things we keep
closeted away in our minds— thoughts about who we think we are; thoughts that
are so gross, so personal, so humiliating, so awkward, so. . . Yick!—that we
would never want to let another person see them. You can run your own
personal laundry list of what those things for you—but whatever they are, they
make us feel so uncomfortable about ourselves that all we want to do is hide
from them. We seal them off in some dark corner of our minds and never look at
them.
When I work with people, there’s a practice I sometimes use to help them get
their stuff out on the table, where they can look at it. I’ll sit across from a person
and say, “Let’s focus our eyes on each other’s Anna” (that’s the third-eye point—
it’s on the forehead, between, and just above, the eyebrows). Then I’ll say to the
person, “If there’s anything at all that you can bring to mind that would be too
uncomfortable, embarrassing, disgusting, obnoxious, scary, or wild to share with
another human being, share it with me. Go ahead.” Saying that is like saying,
“Don’t think of a rhinoceros.” What immediately comes to mind is whatever it is
you most want to hide: “When I’m alone, I pick my nose.” Or “I’d like to have
sex with my mother.” Or whatever it is that you’ve been hiding. If the person
can bring herself or himself to be really honest, to tell me what comes to mind,
that brings it out into the light, which is the first step in letting go of it.
That exercise also lets us see that we aren’t as vulnerable as we thought we
were. I’ll start to do that exercise with somebody, and that person will say, “Oh,
no—I can’t tell you that!” Then he’ll wrestle with it for a while, and finally he’ll
say, “Well, all right, I’ll tell you. I masturbate thinking of my father’s penis, and
I tie my legs together first.” Then he waits for some kind of reaction from me—
he waits for me to gasp, or draw back, or look askance or something. But I’m
just sitting there with my male, chanting, “Ram, Ram, Ram. . .” He could have
said anything! Whatever it is, it’s just another thing. Yeah, right, so what else is
new? What stuff could you possibly have that’s unique? Do you really think
you’ve got stuff that’s so special? I’ve been doing this exercise with people for
years now, and I haven’t heard anything new so far. Little permutations on this
and that, but nothing really new. And furthermore, I haven’t found one thing, yet
that has freaked me out. From where I’m sitting, in the middle of my mantra, it’s
all just stuff, stuff, and more stuff passing by.
So you let it all come out, and you look it all in the eye. But then once you’ve
brought all the stuff to the surface, once you’ve looked at it in the daylight, the
next question is, how quickly can you let go of it? That’s the critical next step.
You don’t keep dwelling on it— haven’t you had enough of all those
melodramas yet? Let them go;— it’s OK. So you are lewd, lascivious, lazy,
disgusting, disgraceful, perverse, greedy, passionate, hateful, vengeful, and
despicable. Right. And here we are. See? “And here we are”—in other words,
it’s the human condition! We’re all part of it—what can we do? So, finally, you
just let go of all your stuff. You let go of it, inside your head. You just release it
—that’s all. There’s such a sense of lightness and freedom that comes with that.
After you’ve been working with bringing all the terrible stuff out into the
light, it’s a good idea to balance it by flipping the exercise around, and
examining your own beauty and your own divinity. Let yourself experience—
deeply experience—the incredible beauty of your own being, without allowing
any sense of unworthiness to hold you back. Feel the radiance of your own inner
heart, touch the depth of your own inner wisdom. Sit with that, until it deeply
permeates your being. An exercise like that helps offset the whole negative core-ego trip that we seem to be stuck with.
Another way to experience your divinity is to identify yourself with a Being
of Light, like Christ, or Quan Yin, or Rama, or the Buddha. Start by visualizing
her or him “out there,” in front of you, external to yourself. Then gradually begin
drawing that Being into yourself. You can use your breath to help: with every in-
breath, you draw the Being into yourself more deeply. With every out-breath,
you feel that presence filling you. Draw that Being into your heart, into the
center of your own being. Let that presence expand and expand, until it fills you,
until it becomes who you are. Let yourself become that Being of Light and Love.
Then afterward ask yourself, “During the time I was being that Being, what
happened to all those ‘negative’ things in me? Where were they then?”
So my suggestions thus far are that we relax, trust our hearts, and to do
whatever cleaning-up operations present themselves. My final suggestion for a
strategy of Sahara is this: Trust the dharma. Trust it, even if you feel at some
ego level that you’re shucking yourself a bit. It’s very helpful to our Sahara if
we can start looking at the laws working around us and upon us as benevolent.
Notice that I don’t mean benevolent as “nice,” in the sense of something that’s
trying to keep our egos happy or even trying to keep us alive. I mean something
that’s benevolently guiding us through our karma—that is, something that’s
benevolent because it’s helping us to awaken.
My understanding of the dharma is that it’s a system designed to help us on
our evolutionary journey. We are all part of an evolutionary journey, and every
experience happening to us at every moment is a gift, a teaching we’re being
given. All we need is the perceptual stance that allows us to appreciate it for
what it is. This moment, right now: Do you see what a gift it is to your
awakening? It’s perfectly designed to help you break out of the shell of your
ego, to dissolve the separation between yourself and the Beloved.
As I understand the law of it all, we are all dwelling in Grace all the time. The
only thing that ever falls out of Grace is our own thinking mind:We fall because
we think we fell. The minute we give up our thoughts—just our thoughts!—there
we are. God is always exactly one thought away—and the minute we quiet that
thought, here we are again.
Well, the issue of the law and its workings brings us back to those still
unanswered questions about free will and determinism, about karma and
responsibility. I was in a dialogue with Trunk once, in Vermont, and he said to
me, “What do you do about sorcerers?” I said, “What sorcerers, Trungpa? Furthermore, I don’t
see any sorcerers, and besides, I wouldn’t do anything about them, anyway. My
guru takes care of me; that’s his business. I just love God.” And Roche
replied, “You’re copping out.” He said, “These are critical times, Ram Days, and
we must assume responsibility.” I thought about that for a moment, and I
decided that he must be putting me on, so I said to him, “All times are critical,
Roche, and God has all the responsibility.” He said, “No, you don’t
understand. You must take responsibility.”
I’ve come to believe that Trunk was right, in a certain way, and that I was
copping out. If I deny the “sorcerers”—that is, if I deny this physical plane with
its individual differences of good and evil—then I am caught. I am caught in
denial, out of fear of this plane, with all its stuff. I am no less hung up than if I
had been totally preoccupied with the individual distinctions and failed to
appreciate the One that lies behind it all.
So I’ve worked with that concept of “responsibility” over the years, and what
has emerged is a deeper and deeper understanding of the whole question of free
will and determinism, and of the paradox: that they are both simultaneously true.
It’s like there are levels of free will and determinism, almost like a free-will
sandwich, with determinism in between. Before we start awakening to who we
really are, we’re living within the laws of karma, and it’s all just running off
mechanically. But within that mechanical runoff, we think we’re making
choices, and so we have to make them. We have to exercise our “free will.”
Then we begin to become a little more aware, and we see that we have no free
will, that it’s all just law upon unfolding law. We see that everything is just
lawfully running through us, including our apparent “choices.” So we say, “I
have no responsibility—I’m just my karma running off.” But then, as we keep
going further still and transcend the guns, we come into the Brahmanic state—
and there our will is truly, totally, absolutely free. We can do whatever we want
to do.
The only hitch is that by then there is absolutely no desire left within us. In a
state of total bliss, what would you desire? From that place, the only acts we end
up doing with our “free will” are the things we are drawn to do by the workings
of the dharma. That is, we end up acting only to fulfill the law, because there is
nothing else we would conceivably do. We exercise our free will by
surrendering into being the pure instruments of the dharma. All those desires that
preoccupied us for so long? We could fulfill them with a thought—except that
the desires themselves are long since gone. There is no longer any personal trip
whatsoever that would motivate us to act, so although we’re entirely free, we act
only to fulfill our role in the way of things.
So do I have responsibility, or don’t I? Well, I do and I don’t. It all depends
on where I’m standing. These days, I try to stay aware of both levels—to
surrender it all to my guru, and at the same moment to assume responsibility for
my dance. As far as I’m concerned, it is all being done by Maharajah—and yet I
do my best to play my part as impeccably and as responsibly as I can. I am
trying to learn to keep both of those perspectives going at the same time. At first,
back before I met Maharajah, I thought I was making all the decisions. Then I
was caught in rejecting the responsibility, and saying, “Maharajah’s doing it.”
Now, more and more, I’m appreciating that it’s a both/and situation, and I am
living with all the richness of that paradox.
And so it goes. We try to learn to live with all these complicated, multilayered
dimensions of who we truly are. We see the trip we are on, and we see where it’s
taking us. We see that it’s all an inevitable unfolding, and we open ourselves
more and more to the process. In the meantime, we are all just lawfully running
off our stuff. We are all each other’s karma, and it’s all the guru’s game. It’s all
God’s Lila: us and our lives, our melodramas and our Bahamas, it’s all just God
at play.
Krishna describes the various ways in which the divine manifests in the
universe: as that which creates form, as the forms that it has created, and as the
essence within each of those forms. Krishna says, “I am also Brahman. I am the
formless, timeless, spaceless, beginningless, endless Brahman. In each
individual, the spark of that Brahman, the Atman, is me.” So Krishna produced
each individual; Krishna is each individual; Krishna is within each individual.
We are all Krishna. We are all God. And through the experiences of incarnation
after incarnation, our souls will shed the veils that separate us from the Beloved.
Slowly, slowly, we begin to appreciate the awesome nature of the design of it
all. Just think: All of this—all of it!—is a totally preprogrammed trip we are on,
a trip that is taking us through this dance of incarnations, through all the myriad
roles and forms, all to bring us back to God, back into the One.
Sometimes we get a glimpse behind the scenes, and we see our own
lives as stories running their course. All the choices and decisions and crises:
most of the time we’re seeing them all as: “What should I do next??!” But then
we turn the page—and all of it was already written. It’s like a murder mystery,
where you are the butler walking toward the pantry on page 42. But you are also
the person who is reading the story—and who’s read it all before, it seems, so
that somehow you already know what’s going to happen when the butler reaches
the pantry. And finally, when you’re ready and when the moment is ripe, you
recognize that you are the author as well.
And behind the butler and the reader and the author, behind the Brahman and
the Prakrit, behind the formless and the forms, behind every polarity and every
distinction—I am. Formlessness to form, form to formlessness—all one. Sub EK.
And in recognizing that dance of the formless and the forms, we recognize the
sacredness of everything. Every thing. So we begin to acknowledge that
recognition, and we begin to respect that sacredness: by reinvesting our lives
with Spirit; by rediscovering ways of honoring the sacred; by offering ourselves
and our incarnations into the fire, as our sacrifice to God. And it all gets lighter
and lighter, it all starts to become more and more transparent. We are still doing
our dance, but our egos are less and less intrusive all the time. We are dancing
more lightly. We are learning we can walk without touching the ground.
The Course Syllabus for The Yoga's of the Bhagavad Gita
In addition to the lectures, this course includes a number of exercises designed to
provide experiences which can evolve into a complete Sahara (program for
spiritual practices) based upon the Rita. The exercises include:
This syllabus is reproduced from the original and contains some variations in
typography and usage from the rest of this book.
A. KEEPING A JOURNAL
During this five-week journey, beginning as soon as possible, keep a journal in
which you record the insights and experiences that arise from going deeply into
the Rita. Like the other exercises, writing will be used as a vehicle for becoming
more conscious, for becoming an open book. Journals have a way of reminding
us that we are constantly changing, that we are constantly changing, that there is
no immutable, fixed self. “I seem to be a verb,” says Buckminster Fuller in his
journal.
The first entry should concern the personalizing for you of Arjuna’s
predicament as defined in chapter 1. His despair, confusion, inner struggle,
depression, loss of Seymour of experiences, desire to cling to old habits, etc., are to
be recognized as part of the journey. What specific anecdotes or immediate
states from your own “personal history” can you bring to mind which are a
foundation for your empathy with Arjuna’s situation.
Subsequent entries will include your reactions to each of the various exercises
in the course as well as to points in the text or lectures from which you
experience a profound affect. Entries can be as brief or extensive as you wish to
make them.
The entries can be in any form, whatever form feels right for the transmission.
Some might be in discursive diary form; others might be less linear, more poetic.
You may want to include quotes from other beings who are connected to your
spiritual growth, or pictures, or anything that fits between the pages. Don’t write
for an audience or reader. It should be your honest experience, a record of
your own journey through these paths of consciousness, simple comments on
what you are seeing about yourself, your world, and your relation to the
teachings of the Rita.
It is helpful to meditate before writing, to get closer to the source of the Word.
If you can clear your mind, if you can create an open space where there is no
thinking, no trying, the words will arise spontaneously, and you will only have to
transfer them to paper.
At the beginning of the fifth week those of you who wish formal course credit
will be asked to submit your journal. In general, they will be scanned for the
administrative purpose of determining a “pass” or “not pass” for the course. Any
sincere journal effort will, of course, get a “pass.”
Because of the number of students registered in the course and the time
limitations, it will be impossible to read more than a page or two of any journal.
If there are one or two specific pages which you wish the staff to read or
comment upon—please note and clearly mark the page numbers on the cover. If
there are specific pages you do not wish to have read, also clearly make note of
these. The journals will be returned to you.
B. CONTEMPLATION
The characteristic of intellectuals is that they like what they cannot understand.
If they do not understand it they will say, “Very good, very good.” If it is
something they can easily understand, they say,“Nothing new, nothing special.”
In true spiritual work, intellectual achievement per se is inadequate. The mind
must carry out its conclusions in the heart, the seat of the emotions. The
emotions, in turn, must effect actual deeds.
Scriptural study can bring to us both exhilaration and humility. The sublimity
of the words of truth will bring delight and inspiration to our minds and hearts.
We will be stimulated to continue our study. Humility will come as we realize
the inherent limitations in the intellect’s attempt to fully integrate and understand
the Nature of Truth. The Word may be a taste, but we humbly realize that the
“word” is not the thing. Our minds are continually inspired, humbled and blown
as we advance in our studies.
When we concentrate, we always concentrate on an object produced by our
own mind. However, when a person is calm enough and pure enough, the act of
concentration may, as Aldous Huxley says, merge into “the state of openness
and alert passivity in which true contemplation becomes possible.” True
contemplation is true prayer, a state of union with the divine. Contemplation in
its lower forms is discursive thought. Don’t get lost in the lower forms.
EXERCISE
Begin this exercise early in the day, preferably after your morning
centering practices. Choose a verse or a portion of a verse from the
Bhagavad Gita which seems particularly meaningful to you right
now, which touches some place inside of you. Read the verse
several times. Try to understand the meaning of the verse with your
rational mind. Now read it again and take the meaning inside. Just
sit with it—not using the mind to understand. Take it as deeply
within your heart as it wants to go. If you wish, do this last step
again. Let the verse take you where it will, but witness the
distractions and images that are brought up in your mind along the
way.
During the remainder of the day, when you find yourself
becoming anxious, speedy, bored, or just in need of centering,
remember the Rita verse and let it take you inside once more.
If you truly desire freedom, and you understand and believe that
living the truth of the Rita will actually set you free, you will find
that the Rita becomes more and a more integral part of your daily
actions.
Optimally this exercise with the Rita would be done daily during the entire
five weeks of the course.
In addition, select from time to time other objects of contemplation, such as:
A holy picture (you will find later that any picture can become
holy through contemplation).
A flower, leaf, rock, tree, etc. Sitting by a stream and
contemplating the water is a very powerful exercise.
A divine quality such as loving-kindness for all beings,
compassion, equanimity, etc.
The marketplace as you sit on a bench at a bus stop, etc.
Anything else (e.g., relationships, etc.) which brings you to a
place of deeper understanding.
Time.
The body is always in time, the spirit is always timeless, and the psyche is an amphibious creature, compelled by
the laws of man’s being to associate itself to some
extent with its body, but capable, if it so desires, of
experiencing and identifying itself with its spirit.”
—A. Huxley
Time is what keeps the light from reaching us. There is
no greater obstacle to God than time.
—Eckhart
Our true future is our own growth in Now, not in the
tomorrow of passing time.
—Nicole
In order to open the doors to a feeling of what time is and how our lives
function in relationship to it, it is useful to experiment with the following:
EXERCISE
Do each of the following for 10 minutes, one after another:
Watch your breath—follow it as it enters the body and as it
leaves.
Eat your favorite food.
Watch TV or listen to the radio with your eyes closed.
Sit around and do nothing.
Notice how your perception of time changes in each activity.
EXERCISE
Sit quietly for 20 minutes. Divide a page of your journal into two
columns: Past and Future. List simply your thoughts under the
headings. Reflect on how much of your thought comes under these
two categories.
EXERCISE
Conceive of a world of only two dimensions—all surface (length
and breadth), but with a small extension into the third dimension
(thickness), like a piece of paper. Imagine beings living in this
paper world, cognizant of nothing else but their world and what lies
in it. Now if a pencil is pushed through the paper, they would know
only a cross-section of the pencil because that would be all the
pencil in their world.
Envision our relationship with time as limited in the same way.
For us, the pencil exists in its entirety—the beginning and the end.
For them, only the cross-section in the paper exists. The cross-section in their world corresponds to the measure of time called
“present moment.” What the paper beings knew with their two-dimensional senses, we would know to be only relatively real—
only a part of the pencil. Reflect on the possibility that our sense of
“passing time” may also be only relatively real.
If one of us could descend into the paper world, learn the two-dimensional views and habits of thought, and explain that this
world is only a limited expression of an infinitely larger and
different world, what would they say? Examine your views of time
in this light.
In your journal keep a list of the objects of contemplation you work with and
diary notes if you wish. If you are not able to “grok” or fully incorporate one or
more of them initially, perhaps you will want to work with them again later.
C. MEDITATION
The quieting of the mind is perhaps the single most important foundation for all
other yogic practices. Europa has provided meditation halls for us. If you are not
in the habit of meditating regularly, it would be useful for you to attend a regular
sitting each day at one of these halls. The presence of other meditators and a
meditation master helps. Later, as you prefer, you can meditate in any quiet
place where you will not be disturbed during the period of practice.
Each week throughout the course, during a lecture period, a meditation
teacher of Satipatthana Vipassana from the Theravada Buddhist tradition will
introduce one of a series of formal meditation exercises. He and other members
of the staff will be available during office hours to advise you about any
difficulties you may encounter.
If you are already an adept in another form of meditation, or are
simultaneously receiving meditation instructions in another course at Europa,
feel free to pursue these other practices if you prefer.
D. THE WITNESS
“Suddenly I remembered that I had forgotten to
remember myself !”
—Suspense
The method of developing the witness is useful practice on the path, although it
must be eventually left behind with other methods. The blossom must go as the
fruit will grow. It is a voluntary creation of the intellect, a place of detached
watching of phenomenal activity, where no judging or comparing takes place.
(“If you wish to see the truth/then hold no opinions for or against anything.” 
Just see what is. The witness dwells in the cool space between the heat of one’s
imagined self and one’s projections. It is an aspect of ego used to extricate
yourself from unconscious attachments to other aspects of ego.
Moments of consciousness are brief compared to the vast intervals of
unconscious, mechanical, conditioned ways of being. We are continuously
losing the thread of attention, seeing who we are, losing it again, finding it again,
being pulled this way and that by the surrounding forces.
The witness, however, does not come into existence by desire or decision
alone. It must be developed by specific techniques and exercises. Certain
meditation practices of mindfulness may be used as well as exercises that take us
out of our normal patterns. Many of the exercises in this course will allow us to
observe our beings through new lenses. Special mindfulness meditations will
also be taught during the course to help in establishing the witness.
Situations that take us out of our normal patterns often allow us to observe our
workings more clearly. Time of silence and fasting are examples of this. Yet all
our daily actions are available to the witness, particularly if we slow them down
enough to see the precise quality inherent in them. Opening a door, eating a
salad, washing a dish—all are potential exercises in mindfulness. Any of our
usually “thrown away” actions can have the clarity of the tea ceremony.
The witness is not evaluative. It does not judge your actions. It merely notes
them. Thus, if you perform an act because of desire, such as eating something
that is not helpful to your Sahara, and then you put yourself down for having
eaten it. . . The witness—when it finally appears—would merely note: (a) he is
eating such-and-such, and (b) he is putting himself down for eating such-and-
such. Thus, the witness has noted a “you” of desires and a super-ego you. . . Two
“youare.”
This point is important. Most of the time the inner voices of most people are
continually evaluative. “I’m good for doing this” or “I’m bad for doing that.”
You must make that evaluative role an object of contemplation as well. Keep in
mind that the witness does not care whether you become enlightened or not. It
merely notes how it all is.
Appearance of the Witness
At first the witness is adopted because of an intellectual understanding of the
need to separate the Self from the Doer. You probably remember your witness
only now and then, when you are in a calm dispassionate state of mind. The
moment you get distracted you lose the witness. Later you “come to” and
remember that you forgot.
For example, you are walking down a street witnessing yourself walking
down a street. You feel happy and witness feeling happy. . . And so it goes. Then
you meet someone or see something that irritates you. Immediately you get
irritated and forget all about the witness. The adrenaline pumps through you and
you think angry thoughts. At this point “angry me” is who you are. Only much
later do you remember that you were attempting to witness.
At that point you promise yourself that you won’t forget again. Ah, how little
you know about the subtleties of the seductions of the other “youare.” Again you
are walking and again witnessing walking and so forth. This time you meet with
another situation which irritates you. Again you lose your witness (or center as it
is called sometimes) and again your endocrine glands secrete, and you think
angry thoughts. But this time right in the middle of the entire drama you “wake
up”. . . That is, you realize your predicament. But at this point it is difficult to get
free of the angry you because you are already getting much gratification. (It’s
like trying to stop in the midst of a sexual act.) And so you use some
rationalization such as “I know I should be witnessing but after all he deserves to
be punished” and with that you climb back into the “angry you” role with a
certain amount of self-righteousness. And so it goes through thousands of such
experiences.
After a time (however long is necessary) you notice that although you still
lose the witness (fall asleep) as often as before, you are starting to “remember”
sooner. That is, you are getting to the point where the actual falling asleep is
starting to “wake” you. This is a big step forward.
Again, after some time, it all gets much more subtle. Now you are walking
down the street and again you witness it all. . . And again an “irritant” presents
itself. This time—as you are about to get angry— the witness says, “Ah, about to
get angry, I see.” This often short-circuits the energy the “angry you” was
fueling up with, and it falls away. So now the lapse between being awake and
being asleep is getting much smaller. Simultaneously, you begin to note that you
don’t fall asleep (i.e., fall out of the witness) nearly as often. Throughout the day
you are remaining centered in the witness watching the drama of life unfold.
Later, when you are established in the witness, it will begin to disappear as a
conscious stance, and you will be left with a feeling of spacious, timeless
presence surrounding each act.
E. GIVING AND RECEIVING
“Neither give nor receive.”
—Patanjali
“Not as the world gives do I give.”
—Jesus
“Saints and birds don’t collect.”
—Need Karol Baba
True giving and receiving are just part of the energy flow of the constantly
changing universe in which we are all one and everything belongs to all of us. . .
All the food and all the books and all the houses and cars and clothes and all the
energy of the universe. Maharajah, who owned nothing but a blanket, and he
periodically gave that away, said, “Why give me money? All the money in the
universe is mine.” (Then he laughed.) We all share in it—it belongs to all of us
and none of us. “Neither give nor receive,” warned Patanjali. Don’t be a giver or
a receiver, just a void channel for the ever-changing energy. True giving is
dwelling in a state of spontaneous compassion, dwelling in the open heart space.
True receiving is the same. From that space you perceive a need in someone, and
you fill it if you can. No ego motives. Pure action.
That’s one level. At another level, most of us own things and desire to own
more things. When we give, there is usually some feeling that “This is mine. I’m
giving it to you, then it will be yours. And you should thank me and think that I
am a generous person and love me a little more than if I hadn’t given it to you.”
Often our gifts are Greek horses in Troy—they are filled with soldiers of the
mind. They are given to fulfill our desires for power over others.
In Hindi there is no commonly used word for “Thank you.” One rarely hears it
expressed. The Indian tradition holds that giving is part of doing your dharma.
One gives what is appropriate and prescribed for him to give and “why should I
be thanked for doing what is my duty?”
Most of our giving and receiving habits are based on the ego-created sense of
separateness. They keep us from experiencing true giving and receiving, which
is simply dwelling in the heart space, the center, and letting the energy flow
through. When we are being still within that space, compassion—unconditioned
love—arises spontaneously. For many of us, the most direct path to the center is
meditation. When you’re there, you know openness. You know you are not the
doer, the giver, the receiver.
To work with these exercises is to try to give and receive from within that
consciousness and to witness yourself doing it. Choose two of the following
exercises—one that seems difficult for you (it will show you where you’re deeply
attached) and one that seems easy (it will allow you to be more gentle with
yourself, go more slowly, spend more time witnessing your attachment). After
doing each of the exercises, write about it in your journal.
GIVING EXERCISES
Give away fruit on the street. Take enough to last a few hours so
that you’ll experience a wide range of responses from people.
Offer it to passersby. You might try doing it at two locations: one
where many people are hungry (industrial and campus
lunchtime) and then one where they’re probably not (middle-class shopping area in mid-afternoon). Watch the difference in
your inner and outer behavior in the two places. Don’t be
attached to the fruits.
Give away some of your possessions.
Give away something you don’t care about and then give away
something that is precious to you.
Give something to someone you like and then something to
someone you don’t know or are not quite straight with.
Give two gifts—buy one and make the other.
Give something to your parents or your children.
Give away money anonymously.
Give fruit or sweets at an institution—a mental hospital or
orphanage or old-age home.
Give something to a child and then something to an adult.
Give time. Offer an hour or a day in service to a friend or
institution.
Give it all away! (Except for your journal.) Because the
administrators of the course have not done this particular
exercise, we are offering it as useful based on hearsay.
RECEIVING EXERCISES
For one day eat only what is offered to you by others. (Don’t tell
anyone what you are doing until the day is over.) Many yogis in
India practice this tapas ya. It helps you realize that you are not
the Prime Doer and awakens you to the level at which it is being
done for you.
Reflect on recent things that have been given to you and your
reactions to these gifts.
“Satisfied with whatever comes unasked. . . Even acting
he is not bound.”
—Rita 4,22
“Tram, a saint in India and a poor man, was once
given ten sticks of sugarcane as a gift. On his way
home, he gave away nine of the sticks to beggars,
saving one for himself. When he arrived home and told
his wife, she beat him with the remaining stick.”
—Story told by Maharajah
F. SILENCE
“The whole world is tormented by words And there is
no one who does without words. But only insofar as one
is free from words Does one really understand words.”
—Sarah (early Tactic Buddhist)
Select a day when you can arrange to go deeply into silence. Choose a time with
the least obligation for speaking, having previously taken care of business
matters and concerns for physical maintenance. It is probably best to tell your
friends about the exercise so they will understand. Don’t speak to anyone during
the day, though at least part of the day should be spent among people. Use brief
written notes when necessary. Be compassionate in your silence; don’t make
other people uptight in your presence. If you are becoming too fierce in your
resolve, and your living situation is becoming awkward or uncomfortable, stop
and wait for a day when you can handle it better.
This day of silence is part of the continuing exercise of developing the witness
and its reflection in your journal. Silence gives us the space to listen to the many
voices we are. Journal entries might include some of this inner dialogue as well
as other teachings of the silence, such as an awareness of how others around you
use conversation.
When the impulse to speak arises, this energy might be channeled into a
spiritual affirmation or mantra, the Prayer of the Heart, the Triple Refuge, or
whatever method is right for you.
Sometime during the day, reserve at least one hour for the silence of body,
speech, and mind. Find a comfortable position for the body, keeping the spine
erect, and determine to sit for an hour without moving at all. At the same time,
practice the silence of the mind through meditation or prayer. (“The inner silence
is self-surrender— living without the sense of ego.” —Ramona Maharishi) You
will already be practicing the silence of speech. These three silences—of body,
speech, and mind—are known as the Noble Silence.
Some inspirational words on the unspoken:
“I realized in this place that people feared silence more
than anything else, that our tendency to talk arises from
self-defense and is always based upon a reluctance to
see something, a reluctance to confess something to
oneself. Directly a person is quiet himself, that is,
awakes a little, he hears the DI fervent intonations and
begins to distinguish other people’s lies.”
—Suspense
“Quietness is master of the deed.”
—Tao Te Ching
“My life is a listening— His is a speaking. My salvation
is to hear and respond. For this, my life must be silent.
Hence, my silence is my salvation.”
—Thomas Merton
“Silence provides economy of psychic energy and
increased power of concentration.”
—Meter Baba (silent for the last 40 years of his life)
“Silence is the language of God— It is also the
language of the heart.”
—Swami Savanna
“Be still and know that I am God.”
—Psalm XAVI
“Silence is the mother of truth.”
—Thomas Merton
“Only that which can be expressed in words is being
said.”
—Amanda Mai Ma
G. PAPAYA
“When in recollection he withdraws all his senses from
the attractions of the pleasures of sense, even as a
tortoise withdraws all its limbs, then his is a serene
wisdom.”
—Bhagavad Gita, 4–58
Tapas ya or religious austerity is the most direct way of dealing with attachment.
Fasting, silence, and sexual continence are widely practiced papayas.
Fasting as a spiritual practice not only cleanses your body, but alters your
consciousness just enough to allow you to hear the inner voices a little more
clearly than usual. Fasting also gives those voices something to struggle with. If
you can dwell in the witness place, you’ll be able to hear arguments from the
grossest to the most subtle.
Try jumping into the fire. Completely stop eating for a prescribed period of
time. This gives you the space in which to witness the desire (probably over and
over again)—space in which to see that you are not the desire; space in which to
see how the desire rises and then falls away. And from this inner struggle comes
the fire which will eventually consume your impurities.
Resolve firmly to fast for a full day (24 hours). You might make the resolve
just before sleep or just after your morning meditation, when you’ll hear it in the
deeper places. Then, in the middle of the morning, when one of the many voices
of the ego announces, “Tomorrow would really be better—I have so much to do
today,” or “Small bites don’t count,” you can refer that voice to your resolve and
get on with the business of fasting.
Decide before you begin whether you will take juices, or fruit, or just water
during the day. Some say the purest fast is to take just water; Maharajah said,
“Always take a little something.” Whatever you do, it is important to take plenty
of liquids (water, unsweetened herbal tea, etc.) to prevent dehydration. If you
have to decide during the day what you will take, you may become confused
about whether you are really keeping the fast. The simplest practices are best—
decide on the rules for the day and then just remind yourself every time you are
tempted. “Pleasures of the senses, but not desires, disappear from the austere
soul.” Rita, 4–59
It is best to do this fast on a relatively quiet day—if you’re concentrated on
busyness all day, you may not even realize that you are fasting—you’ll be
aware only of a gnawing hunger. You should try to stay quiet enough to hear the
workings of the ego.
Austerities are an act of will and will, can be used to strengthen the ego as well
as to subjugate it. Be aware of any spiritual pride, self-pity, or feelings of
competition that may develop. But if you undertake this exercise as an offering
to the one Divine Being, there will be little room for these ego manifestations to
arise.
Make your journal entries either during the fast or just when it is over. Such
insights are elusive.
Re-enter the food realm gently, respectfully. “From food creatures come into
being.” Take juice or fruit as your first meal and be careful not to overeat the day
after your fast—your digestive system may not be able to handle it. Continue to
witness your relation to food. Watch to see how not eating has made the habits
of eating a little more conscious.
“Offer unto Me that which is very dear to thee— which
thou oldest most covetable. Infinite are the results of
such an offering.”
—Sri mad Bhagavan
H. HATH YOGA ASANA AND PANAMA
During the course it would be useful for you to become tuned to your body as
the temple in which you dwell; as the most immediate environment in which you
reside. An unhealthy or tense body can be a major impediment to one’s effort to
open one’s heart and concentrate one’s mind. While it is true that the changing
of mental and emotional tendencies will in itself cool out and harmonize your
body, conversely, purifying of the physical will help in harmonizing the mind
and heart.
The traditional Hindu method for tuning, calming, and vitalizing the body is
Hath Yoga, which involves consciously assuming a set of meditative postures
or “Asana” and controlling the breath (Panama). Certain of the Asana, in
addition, are primarily concerned with liberating or transmuting energy from one
form to another or from one part of the body to another, and with purification of
the blood and “Nazis” (spiritual nerves).
Intensive hath yoga practiced for five weeks would rather dramatically
change:
Your ability to sit quietly in meditation without being
preoccupied with your body.
Your desires with regard to certain foods, tobacco, drugs, by
Your desires with regard to certain foods, tobacco, drugs, by
sensitizing you to your subtle body reactions.
Your general body tone and sense of well-being.
However, even twenty minutes a day would be a useful start.
Many of you already know a set of Asana and panoramic exercise. For those
of you who do not and wish to receive an instruction manual and guidance,
please see one of the teaching fellows.
Here we offer one composite exercise known as Sorry Namaskaram—the
Sun Worship. It should be done four to six times on a level space in a quiet
place. Clothing should be light and flexible. It should not be done within two
hours after eating.
EXERCISE
Sorry Namaskaram: The Sun Worship
Traditionally this is done early in the morning, facing the sun, with
an attitude of worship. It is a good way to begin any Asana session.
Exhale 1) Stand erect with palms touching opposite the middle of
chest, fingers upward.
Inhale 2) Raise arms over head, locking thumbs. Bend backward,
looking up, with feet firmly planted.
Exhale 3) Bend forward, separate hands, keeping the knees
straight, but not locked; keeping head between arms, placing palms
flat on the floor if possible.
Inhale 4) Stretch the left leg back, bringing the left knee to the
floor. The right foot remains between the hands. Look up and back.
Stretch and curve spine.
Stretch and curve spine.
Exhale 5) The right leg is brought back to meet the left foot. The
body is forming an arch.
Inhale 6) Bring your knees to the floor, then the chest and chin,
in a flowing motion. The palms should be beneath the shoulders.
Hold breath 7) Lower the pelvis and stretch up the head, neck,
and chest, looking up and back.
Exhale 8) Bring the head between the arms, raising the body
once again to an arch.
Inhale 9) Thrust the left leg forward between the hands, with the
left knee touching the chin. Look up.
Exhale 10) Bring the right leg forward, straighten out the knees.
Return to position 3.
Inhale 11) Stretch up and back into position 7.
Exhale 12) Bring arms down, palms together, as in position 1.
Note: To quiet a restless mind, do slowly. To bring alertness to a
dull mind, do rapidly.
Sun Salutation: This was an illustration from the original Course
Syllabus. It shows the twelve poses of Sorry Namaskaram, the
sequence of yoga postures known as the Salutation to the Sun.
I. JAPAN YOGA
The “Word” is one of the most powerful devices for transforming your
perceptions of daily life experiences. Repeating a word or phrase which is
associated with your ever-deepening spiritual awareness can become a moment-
to-moment way of “remembering.” Repetition of the name, such as RAM and
KRISHNA, which have come to represent the various aspects of God, work in
this way. Or a mantra such as the Tibetan OM MANI PADUA HUM, which
reminds us of the jewel on the lotus which is manifest in our heart, is used similarly.
To help keep your matrix word or phrase going, it is often useful to work
with a kinesthetic reminder such as beads (called a male or rosary). We will
provide you with a small male which you can use for this purpose.
In beginning to work with mantra it is advisable to set aside an extensive
period of time for doing only the mantra: three or four hours at least, preferably
longer. This is the investment period.
Then, each morning, as you start to awaken, come as quickly as you can
“remember” into the mantra. At first, say it aloud. When it feels right, let the
matrix repetition become sub-vocal. Later it becomes mental and finally
continues to sound only in your heart. If the mental repetition falls away and all
that is left is the feeling, just keep “listening” to this feeling of the mantra.
During the remainder of the day keep the mantra going as much as possible. If
the mantra is on your lips but not in your heart, don’t worry. The sound itself
will eventually find its way to the cave of your heart if you persist.
Co-ordinate the mantra with your steps as you walk. Realize the vibration of
the mantra in each person you meet, even their (and your own) impurities.
Notice that when your mind is calm, the mantra is as delicate and subtle as you
will allow; when you are floundering, the mantra is also there, as strong and as
gross as you need. Notice which desires, which situations, separate you from the
mantra. And then gently come back to it. No blame.
One of the most beautiful stories of the use of mantra is The Way of the
Pilgrim, translated by R. M. French. In this tale, a simple man transforms his
life, and the lives of those around him, through the use of “the Jesus prayer.”
“I go about now and ceaselessly repeat the prayer of
Jesus, which is more precious and sweet to me than
anything in the world. At times, I do as much as forty-three or -four miles a day and do not feel that I am
walking at all. I am aware only of the fact that I am
saying my prayer. When the bitter cold pierces me, I
begin to say my prayer more earnestly, and I quickly
get warm all over. . . And doing this I am filled with
joy. God knows what is happening to me.” “The power
and the effect of a mantra depend on the spiritual
attitude, the knowledge and the responsiveness of the
individual. The sabra or sound of the mantra is not a
physical sound (though it may be accompanied by such
a one), but a spiritual one. It cannot be heard by the
ears but only by the heart.”
—Lama Dorinda
“Place the name of RAMA as a jeweled lamp at the
door of your lips and there will be light, as you will,
both inside and out.”
—Tulsa Was
J. GOING TO CHURCH OR TEMPLE
“If even two come together in my name, I am there.”
—Jesus
“He who worships me comes to me.”
—Krishna
“Christ and Krishna are one.”
—Maharajah
The yoga of worship is America’s chosen path. Much American energy has gone
into institutionalizing worship as a path. In most cities there are dozens of
temples and churches. To most people in America, spiritual paths other than
church worship (such as meditation, renunciation, contemplation, and service)
seem alien. Unfortunately, often the church rituals have lost much of the spiritual
powers with which they were initially invested.
So many people came to church to “get something” that many churches have
little spirit remaining. Yet the rituals were often designed “in the Spirit” and
need only a re-investment or re-consecration in order to once again become
forms for sharing the Light.
By attending church with the devotional stance of the Rita, which can allow
you to see the living Spirit in existing rituals, you can participate in this process
of re-investing the Spirit. Through the interaction of the devotional heart you
bring and the form of the service, you will realize again the Living God.
As our witness develops, we can begin to strip away the many veils between
us and the place where we really dwell with the divine energy.
EXERCISE
Go to two different churches or temples. Do it on the same or
different days. First attend a service at a place of worship different
from the one you were raised in, then go to the one you went to as a
child (if you did). Participate as fully as you can in the service,
finding a shared space while at the same time maintaining a
witness. Watch the ways you hold back from participating, the
ways you judge the congregation and the clergy, and so on. Open
your heart to the prayers, hymns, fellow beings, images, sense of
Presence.
This experience allows you to share an intimate space with
beings you probably are otherwise unlikely to be with. Witness the
beings you probably are otherwise unlikely to be with. Witness the
ways in which this special context changes your perceptions
(projections) of the other participants (fellow pilgrims on the path)
and allows a sense of either communion or separation to manifest.
See if the form of structured worship allows you to surrender to the
Divine—through prayer or singing or merely being in the presence
of group worship. Enter whatever you learn from the experience in
your journal.
K. KIRTAN is the chanting of the names of God—a devotional yogic technique which
has the power to purify and open our hearts. Just as devotion has many levels,
Kiran can be done from any state of mind or level of evolution, and it will lead to
deeper levels of opening and understanding.
Kiran uses music as a vehicle of communication, but is not concerned with
musical ability. Singing beautifully is not important; what is important is singing
from the heart. In devotional singing in India, many times it was the old man
who sang last, with no teeth, raspy broken voice, and hacking cough, who would
totally blow everyone out because he knew what and to whom he was singing,
and the beauty of this communication with God was moving and powerful.
To practice Kiran, the instruction is always to do it in a disinterested spirit.
Give up wanting to “get off” and give up a judgmental, evaluating attitude. Go
into it with an open mind, allowing yourself to make the effort necessary to
experience the way in which this method works. It isn’t necessary to be “feeling
devotional” to sing Kiran; let thoughts and moods pass through making space for
new things to come from within. If you’re blissful, be blissful and singing; if
bored, be bored and singing. Just keep offering it all into the fire of the name.
The more you can give up, the more your attention will orbit around the mantra.
If someone is leading the chanting (call and response), listening is as
important as singing and will help keep the monkey-mind from wandering.
During the night from about 9:30 p.m. of July 3rd until 8:00 a.m. of July 4th,
we will share a traditional Hindu “Maya” (fire ceremony) and the singing of a
chant.
For the all-night chant, bring a blanket or pillow to sit or sleep on. If you need
to nap, do it right there—you may find yourself dreaming the mantra. It’s an
informal experience of sharing space for the night, so bring whatever you need
to keep the physical plane together (juice to drink, etc.), but keep it simple.
The deeper you go, the less you know, the more you are. You may wonder at
times whether you’re chanting the mantra or the mantra is chanting you. Or you
may find that you’ve stepped back far enough so that while you are chanting, the
whole process and all thoughts are being witnessed from a deep calm space
within, and that with each repetition of the mantra this place gets deeper and
more “here.”
Kiran is a devotional yogic technique. For the lovers of God, the very sound
of His name brings joy. It’s said that “in its highest aspect, divine love is nothing
less than the immortal bliss of liberation.”
“Taking the name of God, dive deep, O mind Into the
heart’s fathomless depths, Where many precious gems
(of love) lie hid. Never believe that the bed of the ocean
is bare, If in the first few dives, you fail. With firm
resolve and self-control Dive deep and make your way
into God’s realm.”
—Ramakrishna
“God is not different from His name.”
—Old saying
“When hearing the name once, you shed tears and your
hair stands on end, then you may know for certain that
you do not have to perform devotional rituals anymore.
It will be enough just to repeat the name.”
—Ramakrishna
“However huge may be the stock of our accumulated
sins, the whole of it gets burnt as fuel, is burnt by fire,
as soon as the name of God is uttered with a sincere
heart.”
—H. P. Polar
L. SATAN COLLABORATION
Sharing your inner work with another person who is also on the path can be
useful: helping each other. There are many ways in which such a collaborative
contract to become conscious through one another can be carried out.
EXERCISE
One possibility is to silently sit opposite one another about two feet
apart.
Focus on the point between the eyes of the other individual so
that you can see both eyes and the face. Relax. Sit this way for a
half hour. During this period, or at separate sessions, you can:
Study the other person as a being in an incarnation.
Be aware of being studied and reflect on who you may be
appearing to be in the eyes of the other person. Notice your
feelings at being studied and where judgment creeps in.
Let your models of whom the other person is keep changing. Each
one you fix on, notice, and then let it go.
Don’t dwell on any particular thoughts, images, or sensations
Don’t dwell on any particular thoughts, images, or sensations
(positive or negative). Just allow flow.
Look for the deeper places in yourself and the other person
behind body and personality where you can meet.
Just sit focusing on the point between the eyes.
Note the experiences in your journal. In order that your mind be
free to range unhampered by social anxiety, agree in advance not to
share what you see in each other. It is all right to share what you
experienced in yourself if you choose.
EXERCISE
Another possibility would be to hang out with another person for
several hours taking turns in the role of a witness-reporter who is
attempting to dispassionately study nature in the form of the
processes of the “other.” As the witness, remain quiet inside and
just notice how another being works. As the one witnessed,
experience your life as it is appearing to a dispassionate observer.
Avoid judgments.
Keep a note of the experience in your journal.
M. PUPA TABLE
In developing an inner Center, a meditative stance, or connecting with your heart
cave, it is most useful to create an external quiet space where you can hook up
for refueling.
When setting up the pupa table, choose a quiet place, a place that can be a
refuge. You come home feeling speedy, you’re angry at someone—whatever—
sit down in front of the pupa table and Remember.
Typically, pictures of holy beings, statues, flowers, fruit, beautiful stones or
shells, or things which you associate with the highest place in yourself, are put
on a pupa table. Here you may worship God with form in any way that opens
your heart. You can sing, meditate, offer food, perform ritualistic worship with
bells, candles and mantras, incense, or you may just want to hang out in the
space that you and the pupa table create together.
You may want only one picture on the table. Buddha, say, is your connection,
your refuge, and one statue or picture of Buddha is all you want or need on the
altar. Or there may be many manifestations of the One that brings you to that
place.
A pupa table is a good place to do conscious work on yourself as well as a
place to worship. For example, you feel great love for Christ and His picture is
there, right in the middle. But Shiva is an energy that you would rather not think
about—too fierce. Put His picture or a symbolic Shiva ling am (or a picture of
someone with whom you have real difficulty being conscious) next to the picture
of Christ. In the supportive, quiet atmosphere you are in while in front of your
pupa table, your relationship with Shiva can be more deeply established and the
relationship between and the identity of Christ and Shiva can be realized.
Possibly you’re preoccupied with sex. Then work with a picture of Mary the
Mother of Christ or of Anandamide Ma and perhaps a pornographic photo, too
(if you are a male this time around), and later in the day try to feel the divine
essence in all women that you meet. Perhaps putting a picture of your parents
right between Christ and Buddha would be meaningful work for you right now.
The statue of Buddha is not just a symbol of Buddha, it is Buddha. The picture
of Lord Rama is not just a piece of paper, but a manifestation of the true spirit of
Rama. Realize this and later wherever you are becomes your pupa table, a place
to open your heart and feel the presence of the One Supreme Being.
“Not by the Vedas, or an austere life, or gifts to the
poor or ritual offerings can I be seen as thou hast seen
me. Only by love can men see me, and know me, and
come to me.”
—Bhagavad Gita XI, 53, 54
N. KARMA YOGA
“Do whatever you do, but consecrate the fruit of your
actions to me.”
—Krishna in the Rita
“He who sees the inaction that is in action, and the
action that is in inaction, is wise indeed. Even when he
is engaged in action he remains poised in the
tranquility of the Atman.”
—Rita
Actions done as a sacrifice or offering or in a disinterested fashion are the central
component of the Bhagavad Gita. We consider this yoga at length in the
lectures.
In order to experience the process of this yoga, you will have to look around
you for opportunities to serve as an offering to God. Of course, ultimately you
will experience every act (including the taking of this course) as an exercise in
karma yoga. However, until you become familiar with the stance of a karma
yogi, it would be well to carry out some specific exercises. Try to do at least one
specific karma yogic exercise a week during the duration of the course. By
keeping notes in your journal you will be able to see changes in your approach
and appreciation of the subtlety of this method in even the short time we are
together.
EXERCISE
(possible examples)
Clean litter from the highways surrounding Boulder.
Clean litter from the highways surrounding Boulder.
Volunteer at local hospitals and/or old age homes (Boulder or
Denver) by offering to help and hanging out with the patients.
Perhaps read to the blind or elderly.
Get involved in some local volunteer organization for a day
(recycling center, child care).
Try to choose a project where you don’t immediately fall into your old role as
the doer, i.e., do something that is not usually part of your daily activities. If you
are primarily an intellectual person and choose a project which is manual in
nature, it will probably be easier to remember to keep remembering to offer your
actions.
Also take a few activities you regularly do each day and attempt to do them in
the spirit of karma yoga. Choose one activity you usually “enjoy” and another
which you usually “dislike.” Notice the relation of the karma yogic stance to
these emotional concomitants of the action.
The Supplemental Syllabus
A. VIPASSANA MEDITATION
Being with the universe, just the way it is. Sounds, sensations in the body, just
allowing each sensation to be, to be just the way it is. Sometimes the awareness
is drawn to the sound of a bird, sometimes to coldness in the body, sometimes to
pain, and other times to thought. Just notice your awareness skipping from
sensation to sensation, from thought to thought. If you experience discomfort,
just move your body very gently, noticing the intention to move, and then the
moving.
Notice that the awareness is like a flashlight, and the beam focuses now in one
place, now in another. Sometimes it’s focused on a sensation on the surface of
the body, and other times on a fleeting memory or a plan. At other times it’s
drawn to a sound, when the beam focuses on the sound. Each thought and
sensation arises and draws your awareness to it, and then soon your awareness
passes on to something else.
Let the awareness move—from thing to thing. Notice that the
sensation of a moment ago is now gone. The thought you might have been
having two minutes ago—where is it now? The awareness has gone on to
something else.
Now one of the processes in meditation is concentration, which means, very
simply, bringing that flashlight beam of awareness to one point, and letting it
rest on that one point; and each time it moves away from the point, very gently
bringing it back again. We’re able to use almost any point for concentration;
sometimes it’s a candle flame, or a point on the forehead. In this case, we’ll use
one of the traditional points of focus: the breath. But the whole breath would be
too much to follow, so you pick a very tiny component, a small sensation that
goes along with each breath. There are two places where you can do that. The
first is to focus at the tip of the nose, just inside the nostril. You will notice that
with each in-breath, there is the feeling of air against the inside of the tip of the
nostril, and that with each out-breath there is again the feeling of air passing by
the inside of the nostril. So you can focus at that point, and with each in-breath,
notice it as “breathing in,” and with each out-breath, notice it as “breathing out.”
This meditation is transcribed from Ram Days’s audiotape “Vipassana
Meditation.” It is an example of a session of concentration meditation, in which
the attention is focused on a primary object, in this case the breath.
The alternative point of focus is in the abdomen; within the abdomen is a
muscle, which you can feel rising with each in-breath and falling with each out-breath. As it rises, you note “rising,” and as it falls, you note “falling.” After
you’ve experimented for a few moments with these two options, pick one of
them, and for the remainder of this meditation, stay with that particular choice—
either the “breathing in/breathing out” at the tip of the nostril, or the
“rising/falling” in the abdomen.
This point is now called your primary object. It becomes like the center of a
flower: you let your awareness rest in the center, at the tip of the nose or in the
abdomen; and each time your mind, your awareness, is drawn away from the
primary object—to a thought or to a sensation—notice that it has been drawn
away, and very gently return your awareness to the primary object.
Meditation is a very sweet art. You’ll find the primary object becomes like a
home, like a cave, and after a while you are content just to stay with the breath,
and give the awareness a rest from all of its wandering and jumping, here and
there.
It helps in the early stages to silently note “breathing in” and “breathing out,”
or silently note “rising” and “falling.” Each time the awareness moves away, as
soon as you notice it, in a very soft and gentle way draw it back to the
rising/falling or to the breathing in/breathing out.
If you’re just beginning in meditation, you will notice how resistant the mind
is to staying on one point. It’s had years of freedom to roam here and there. It’s a
very slow and patient process, to train the awareness to stay with the primary
object. You must be very gentle with yourself.
If your awareness is drawn away by pain, note “pain,” and then return to the
primary object. If the pain persists, then you may want to make the pain itself
your primary object, and just notice the pain as precisely as you can. To keep the
mind from wandering, keep it right with the pain. When the pain dissolves, then
you turn once again to the breath.
If you experience sleepiness, you may want to take a few intentional deep
breaths, noticing them very attentively as “rising/falling” or as “breathing
in/breathing out,” and then let the breath return once again to its natural rhythm.
Thoughts that arise about the meditation or about your ability to do the
meditation are just judgments, just thoughts that are drawing your awareness
away; note them, and then once again return to the “breathing in, breathing out”
or to the “rising, falling.”
Examine the breath at your point of choice very precisely. In the “breathing
in” or in the “rising,” note the beginning, the middle, and the end of it. Note the
space after the in-breath, before the out-breath begins. Then in the “breathing
out” or in the “falling,” note the entire exhalation—the beginning, the middle,
and the end of it. Notice the space between the exhalation and the next
inhalation.
During these few minutes of meditation, you have no other business than just
to stay with the breath. You’re free not to have to plan, or to remember, or to
collect sensations. Just come home to the breath. Sounds, sensations, thoughts—
each like a flower petal that draws your awareness away from the center. Notice
it, and return again to the center.
At the conclusion of each meditation, it’s good to take whatever quietness you
have achieved, and allow that opening to make you a conduit, to bring messages
of peace and light out into the universe. You may want to offer this “Etta
Meditation,” or blessing, to do that:
May all beings be free from danger
May all beings be free from mental suffering
May all beings be free from physical suffering
May all beings know peace.
Om
B. MINDFULNESS MEDITATION ON FOOD
by Joseph Goldstein
One way to stay grounded on the experiential level rather than on the thought or
conceptual level is to develop a very strong mindfulness of all the processes
involved in eating. A lot is revealed about our own minds and bodies when we
learn to eat with awareness, to eat mindfully. First, we begin to see that point at
which desire arises. We then become mindful of desire and our subsequent
actions. As we observe the processes involved, there can be a deep and
penetrating insight into the fact that it is all impersonal phenomena happening.
There is no self, or I, or me, or mine in the food, there is no self or I in the eating
of it, or in the awareness of the eating. It is all an empty, impersonal process
going on.
Eating meditatively is a profound practice, in that one can attain high states of
Sarah and even enlightenment in the very process of eating. There have been
many cases, in meditation centers or where people are practicing to a very high
degree, where in the very process of lifting the hand, someone may go into
Sarah, and their hand just stays there, halfway to their mouths, for as long as
they stay in Sarah. Or they may experience the moment of nirvana while
eating, experiencing a moment of enlightenment. It’s a very good practice to
cultivate.
What we’re going to do now is to learn how to observe eating with a silent
mind, to experience all the different mental and physical processes involved. For
this exercise, you might use a few raisins. The first thing that happens is the
intention to look at the food. So that intention should be noted: “intending,”
“intending.” Then the head turns, so that it can see the food. The turning of the
head should be done mindfully, noting the whole process that’s involved:
“turning,” “turning,” “turning.”
As a result of the turning of the head, the color of the food, comes into contact
with the eye, and seeing-consciousness arises. There should be a mental note, a
state of mindfulness with regard to the fact that we are seeing: “seeing,”
“seeing.” Notice that all the eye sees is color—the eye does not see “food.” Food
is a concept. In this practice of mindfulness we want to stay on the experiential
level of the process. So we note “seeing,” “seeing.”
Because of seeing, the intention arises to move the hand to take the food. The
noting of the mental intention before the act should be done carefully:
“intending,” “intending.” Then the movement of the hand should be done
mindfully: “moving,” “moving.” Just experience the sensations of movement—
no “arm,” which is a concept, no I, no self, no me, no mine. There is simply the
impersonal, material process of moving, and the process of knowing the
movement, all done very meditatively, very mindfully. “Moving,” “moving.”
Then there is touching of the food. The experience of the touch sensation. The
intention to lift the arm—the mental intention— should be noted before the
movement is begun: “intending,” “intending.” That mental intention becomes
the cause of the arm being raised. The cause and effect relationship should be
seen very clearly.
Then “raising,” “raising”—experience the whole movement of the arm. No I,
no me, no mine, no self, simply movement and the awareness of movement. The
arm is brought up. Intention to open the mouth: “intending,” “intending.”
Opening of the mouth: “opening,” “opening.” Very aware, very mindful of all
the physical processes involved, and the knowing of them.
Opening the mouth, then the intention to put the food into the mouth:
“intending,” “intending.” Putting the food into the mouth, placing the food. The
feeling of touch of the food on the tongue—just touch sensations and the
awareness of them. No self, no I, no me, no mine, simply the awareness of
sensation.
The intention to close the mouth: “intending,” then the subsequent closing.
Not chewing yet, unless you want to eat your meal with your arm up in the air.
So—intending to lower the arm, noting the mental intention, then the moving of
the arm, making the movement the object of mindfulness. Then the intention to
begin chewing, and the subsequent chewing process, watching the movement of
the mouth, of the jaws, of the teeth. The awareness of taste—the tasting that
comes in the process of chewing.
Just at this point, there is a very interesting thing which happens: generally
after the first couple of chews, taste begins to arise—and then it disappears! The
food is still in the mouth, but it’s rather tasteless. At this point, because of our
desire for more pleasant taste sensations, we often find the hand again reaching
for more food. Food is still in the mouth, and we’re still chewing it, but the hand
is moving and taking food and putting it into the mouth. Become mindful of the
arising and passing away of the taste and the whole subsequent process, of the
food being mashed up, then the intention to swallow and the swallowing. Again,
the intention arising to take more food. Notice the intention, and then the
reaching for the food again, following the whole process through the taking of
the food, the intending to move the arm and the moving of the arm, the intention
to open the mouth and the opening, the placing of the food, the closing of the
mouth, the replacing of the arm, the chewing, the tasting, the swallowing—all
very distinct, impersonal processes happening.
By cultivating this kind of mindfulness of process, not only do we become
aware of how our desire for food arises, and watch that desire mindfully without
identifying with it, we also begin to penetrate into the very basic nature of the
entire mind-body process. And done very mindfully, it’s a deep and penetrating
meditation.
As a general suggestion to those of you who are cultivating awareness or
mindfulness around food, a useful exercise might be to eat one meal a day (or
even just a piece of fruit) in silence, mindful and very attentive to the entire
process involved. The entire exercise becomes meditation. And in this way we
gradually expand the state of mindfulness to include the entire experience of all
our activities, and we begin to live in a very meditative space. It’s valuable to
cultivate this kind of penetrating awareness.
C. BUDDHIST MEALTIME MEDITATIONS
by Jack Cornfield
The techniques that I’m going to share with you, which come from my teachers
and from the Buddhist tradition, are all designed for the same purpose: for
breaking the illusion of separateness between you and the food, or breaking the
attachment or desire. For it’s not what it is that you eat that makes you wise and
leads to the development of insight, but the process of how you eat that will lead
to that. And the Buddhist emphasis is always on the attitude, on the cultivation
of certain mind-states, on letting go of the attachment to sense desires.
The first meditation that’s done in the Buddhist tradition is a meditation on
loving kindness and compassion, on the Bodhisattva nature, on the sharing of
our food with all the beings in existence. I’ll share with you one Buddhist chant,
a Pale chant, that’s often used to offer food: Same Loki ye Sarah, Ivana Hara
he tukamanunang, oh jinungsabelabante damage Tasha. “May all sentient beings
share this meal with me, and by the power of merit, may all beings live in health
and happiness.” Then throughout the meal you keep to this mind-state of loving
kindness, of compassion, of sharing whatever there is with all the beings in the
universe.
Another technique to use in eating is to consider the food as broken down into
its elements. The purpose of this is to develop detachment and wisdom into the
emptiness of self, or into the Brahmanic nature of all that you’re doing. So you
take your piece of food, and you hold it up and look at it, and you recognize in it
the aspects of the earth element—of solidity, of hardness or softness; of the
element of fire—the heat or cold of it; of the air or vibratory element—the
element of distension that keeps it in that shape; and of the element of cohesion
that keeps it together, the water element. You see that in the food, and you feel
it, and you examine it. And then you look at your own body, and you say, “Wow!
There’s the element of hardness, of solidity. . . The element of heat and cold. . .
The element of vibration, distension. . . The element of cohesion.” So all I’m
doing when I’m eating is taking the elements and putting the elements into
elements. And you notice that when you chew the elements, they change. The
cohesion increases and the hardness disappears somewhat. You can watch the
process of the transformation of the elements from the food as you chew them
and swallow them.
Another way to approach eating is to do a meditation on the emptiness, again
related to the Brahmanic meditation that was spoken of, where you take a piece
of food, and you see that the food is not self, that there’s no one there, just food.
You see your body reaching for the food and holding it, and you look at your
arm and the rest of your body and realize that that’s not you—that’s just the
body. And you look at the mind that knows, that’s watching all that, and you see
that that’s not you either—that’s just awareness of the fact of the body or
awareness of the food. And then as one very famous Buddhist teacher said,
“Eating is like putting nothing into nothing.”
Another technique to use, to break down the illusion of self, the illusion of
separateness, the illusion of permanence, is to look at the whole process of
eating in terms of change, in the change of form and also in the change of feeling
when you’re doing the eating. Imagine the whole sequence. Imagine the genesis,
of the food that grew from the earth, of the green shoot and the ripe stalk or fruit,
then the picking of it, the cleaning of it, the bringing of it to your table. . . Now
seeing the food there before you, and continuing the process—in your mind first,
before you start to eat—of considering the change in the food, the eating of it,
the tasting and swallowing, the change of that food into elements, into
nutriments for your body, into excrement, back into the earth, and the whole
cycle beginning again of the regeneration of food. So you see everything in
terms of a flow, in terms of a process, and you see that it’s all changing. That’s
another way to look at eating as a meditation.
Still another way is to be mindful of sensation and touch. Sensation and
mindfulness of sensation are the basis for a lot of vipassana, or “insight,”
meditation practices, because they’re something you can see very clearly
changing from moment to moment: the arising and ceasing of sensation. So in
eating, you can be aware first of the sensation of yourself sitting there. . . You
can be aware of the sensations in yourself—of hunger, or desire, the feelings in
your body. When you reach for the fork, you can be aware of the sensation of
your hands touching the utensil, feeling that in your fingers; you can be aware of
the sensation of the movement of your arm, bringing the food up to your mouth,
and of the sensation of the touch of the food on your lips. Be aware of the
sensation on your tongue and your teeth, as you chew the food. . . Be aware of
the sensation as you swallow, feeling the food go all the way down into your
stomach. By paying close attention to the sensation, you cut off the
discrimination of your mind. You don’t allow yourself to say, “OOO—wow! That
was delicious!” Or “Ugh. That was awful.” You’re just mindful of the process of
each sensation arising and ceasing as you eat, and so you’re able to cut the
desires.
A way that’s very commonly taught in monasteries, and especially talked
about among the bikes or the monks in the Buddhist tradition, is to look at food
just in terms of its sustenance: the contemplation of food for sustenance. The
body is simply a vehicle to be cared for and not to be pampered, and food is
simply a means of sustaining life to continue your spiritual practice. You’re not
eating because you enjoy eating, but you’re eating as a way to sustain your
energy to continue your practice on the spiritual path.
There’s a story that’s told about the kind of attitude that eventually needs to be
developed in this meditation on food for sustenance: There was a couple and a
young child who were crossing a vast desert. They brought very little food with
them, and they had run out of food and just about run out of water, and they still
had a long way to go. And they were quite sure in fact that they would die. Well,
from the heat of the day and the desert, in fact the child did die. And the two
parents decided that in order to continue the crossing of the desert in their
journey, so they would not die, they would eat the body of the child. And that’s
the attitude of taking food not out of pleasure, not out of desire or out of
attachment, but simply for sustenance, just as those parents ate the flesh of their
own child. That’s a very powerful attitude, one that breaks through the greed and
the attachment to the sense pleasures of eating, and it is another kind of
meditation.
When you’ve developed that attitude, you don’t eat more than you need. All
of these different meditations are merely techniques, devices for developing
balance in the mind. Because the whole of the dharma is just a question of
balance, really. Here you have to balance your greed and your habitual patterns
of enjoyment and attachment with a meditation, to get you to a point where
you’re no longer attached.
When I was first in the monastery in Laos, it was an ascetic monastery, and
I’d been there a few weeks and was really checking it out, to make sure that the
teacher looked like he was enlightened and that all the monks were practicing
right. And I saw some things I didn’t like. Monks were a little sloppy eating, or
they’d get their food, and they’d say their chant, and then they’d start to eat very
fast. And even the teacher I wondered about; he would say very contradictory
things at times to different people. I went to him; I was very disturbed, and I
even thought of leaving and going to find another teacher, a better guru to fit my
model of what a teacher should be like. And I said, “I feel really uncomfortable.
Why do you say one thing to one person and one to another about how we
should eat or how we should act?” And his answer to me was this: “The way I
teach is very simple,” he said. “It’s like someone walking down a path or a road
at night, and sometimes they get off a little bit onto the right side and I see them
and I say, ‘Go left.’ And sometimes they almost fall in the ditch on the left side
and I see them and I say, ‘Go right, go right.’ That’s all I do. And all the
meditations are techniques to use to develop a balance of mind and mental
factors.”
So I asked him further. I said, “Well, I’m still disturbed. Some of the monks
are eating quickly, and even you sometimes seem to be sloppy.” It was very hard
to say—I thought a lightning bolt might strike me! Nothing happened. He just
laughed, and he said, “You have to be thankful for the appearance of
imperfections in your teacher— the things that make him look like he’s not
enlightened.” I said, “Oh, yeah?” And he said, “Because if it were not for these
imperfections, you might be deceived into thinking that the Buddha was
somewhere outside yourself.”
The balance of mind is the key. When there’s a very strong imbalance, you
need strong medicine to balance it. Some of us really get into food trips—
Thanksgiving dinner, or going to the refrigerator and the pickles and olives and
cheesecake and all those wonderful things. And in order to balance that, one
other meditation that’s used is to contemplate on the true repulsiveness of food.
Think about it: the benefits of the meditation on the repulsiveness of food are
that you really begin to know the nature of food and of the process. Your
mindfulness grows. You understand the lust in yourself, and you are able to let
go of it. The meditation on the repulsiveness of food begins with contemplation
on the procurement. So you think, if you still eat meat, of the animals and their
carcasses, and of the flesh and blood and fat, and of the disgusting juices that run
out when the animals are cut open. Or if you don’t eat meat, think of the food
from the earth, and even of the dirt of the earth itself, of the shit from the cows
and the horses, the dirt of all kinds. And in this society, they’re trying to keep
your food clean, so they put in preservatives. But just let the food stand out in
the sun for a short time, and it turns rancid and moldy, or rotten and foul and
oozing and fermenting.
And the meditation for the monks as it’s given in the scriptures is this: he’s
eating his food, he’s dipped his hand into the bowl and is squeezing the food in
his fingers, “and the sweat trickling down from his five fingers wets any crisp
food that there may be and makes it sodden, and when its good appearance has
been spoiled by his squeezing it up, and it’s been made into a ball and put into his
mouth, then the lower teeth function as a mortar and the upper teeth as pestle and
the tongue as a hand, and it gets pounded there with the pestle of the teeth, like a
dog’s dinner in a dog’s trough, while he turns it over and over with his tongue.
And then the thick spittle at the tip of the tongue smears it, and the filth from the
teeth in the parts where the toothbrush cannot reach smear it. When thus mashed
up and besmeared, this peculiar compound, now destitute of its original color
and smell, is reduced to a condition as utterly nauseating as a dog’s vomit in a
dog’s trough. Yet notwithstanding that it is like this, it can still be swallowed
because it can no longer be seen by the eyes. And where does it go? It is
swallowed by one who is twenty-five years old, or thirty years old; it finds itself
in a place like a cesspit, unwashed for those twenty-five years or thirty years.”
That’s strong medicine, but it’s a very effective balance for the passions and
desires that go with the delicious taste of food and with all the food trips in our
culture.
So food isn’t what it appears. The very highest practice, the place where this
initial balance developed, is the practice of vipassana mindfulness. This is the
mindful observation of all the mind and body processes that are involved in
eating, as they change from moment to moment: the thoughts,
perceptions, feelings, and sensations in the form. To quote the Buddha, “The
merit made in serving one thousand meals to the whole order of monks with the
Buddha at its head cannot compare to him who develops clear insight into the
arising and vanishing of phenomena for just one moment.”
D. SATAN MEDITATION
Sat sang means a coming together in Truth. The beauty of having sat sang is that
you are sharing a contract with another person that you will help one another go
to God. That means that you are both consciously working at seeing one another
as souls.
The best way to see another person as a soul is just to sit down and do it. It’s
something to be experienced, not talked about. It’s the place where our
individual differences look like background and not like a figure anymore. If you
have spiritual friends to hang out with, here is a little sat sang collaboration you
might want to try together. It’s like a joint meditation exercise.
Sit down opposite somebody. Get comfortable; take a couple of slow breaths.
Don’t talk to each other—this isn’t a social thing. Don’t “talk” with your
expressions, either—forget about the smiling and the nodding and all those facial
gestures. Just sit and look at the other person.
Focus at a point right between one another’s eyes, so you’re able to see both
of their eyes at once. Now just sit with one another like that, with the eyes as the
focal point for, say, a thirty-minute meditation. Relax, sit there, and let it all
happen to you. Let yourself see all the things that arise in the other person, let
yourself experience all the feelings you have as you are being looked at intensely
by another person. Keep looking and looking.
Pretty soon, you will see the other person’s face begin to change. Sometimes
it will become incredibly beautiful, and sometimes incredibly horrible. Either
way, don’t let it create a reaction in you. Don’t let it suck you in—just stay right
with the eyes and say, “And this too. And this too.” Look at your ten thousand
horrible visions and your ten thousand beautiful visions, and let them all go by.
Just keep looking and looking and looking.
After a while, you will discover that the “stuff” of it all starts to change. It
starts to become ground rather than figure. The good, the bad, the beautiful, the
ugly, all just passing show, and you see deeper and deeper and deeper until you
are just looking at another being who’s looking back at you. You are soul
acknowledging soul.
Those are the kind of games you can play when you have sat sang as your
playmates.
E. HOW TO USE A MALA is a string of beads, used to chant the names of God. It’s the same thing
as prayer beads, or a rosary. A Hindu male typically has either 108 beads (108
being considered a sacred number in Hinduism) or 27 beads (which is one-fourth
of 108). In addition to the 108 or 27 “counting beads,” a male generally has an
additional bead, called the “guru bead,” which hangs perpendicular to the circle
of counting beads. The illustration gives instructions for making one—all you
need are some beads and a string.
A Hindu male is usually worked with by using the right hand. The male is
held resting over the third finger of the right hand, and the beads are brought
toward you, one by one, using the thumb. Each bead counts one repetition of the
mantra. When you get around to the guru bead, you don’t count it, and you don’t
pass it; you stop there, mentally bow to the guru, flip the male around, and start
going back the other way. Each time you come to the guru bead you awaken
once more, then you turn around and go back the way you came.
Now for those of you who are left-handed (as I am): In India, you would be
inclined to use the right hand anyway, because of certain cultural traditions. The
Tibetans, on the other hand, have no such rules; they use their males in either
hand, and with any finger. In the Hindu tradition, you can use any finger of the
right hand to hold the beads, except for the first finger, which is the pointing or
“accusing” finger; you don’t use that one. The reason most people use the third
finger is that there is a nerve on the inside of that finger which is connected to
your spine in such a way that you’re getting a little added benefit from the
practice. It’s similar to an acupressure point, and it adds a little extra energy rush
to the process.
Doing a mantra doesn’t require using a male; the male is just there to add
another dimension to the practice. Besides speaking the mantra, and hearing the
mantra as you speak it, the process becomes tactile as well. If you want a
psychological analysis of the use of a male, you could say that it is a “kinesthetic
cue device.” Without it, you could be doing the mantra and get lost in doing it
mechanically. But if you suddenly feel the bead between your fingers, it wakes
you up again. Bead by bead—it’s like the steps of a ladder, walking you straight
into the Brahman.
Instructions were given on how to make a male and each student
received a bag containing 36 small wooden beads, one larger wooden
bead, a white nylon cord, and a thread from Need Karol Baba’s
blanket with which they could make their own male.
F. THE CHAKRAS
The chakra system works within the energy framework of our bodies; although
the chakras themselves are operating at the astral level, they express themselves
through our bodies’ energy patterns. Traditionally there are said to be seven
chakras, starting with the Tuladhar at the base of the spine, and ending with the
Sahara at the crown of the head. The chakras aren’t physical forms; they’re
more like foci of energy, and they’re located along the subhuman, which is a
kind of astral-level spinal cord. The subhuman is said to run down the center of
the spinal column, but it isn’t something you would find on an X-ray. In the
same way, the “Ida” and the “pin gala” are the “nerves” of the system, running
alongside the subhuman, but they aren’t “nerves” you could dissect in an
anatomy class. These are all astral entities.
The energy which moves through the subhuman is known as “Kundalini,”
which literally means “she who is coiled.” Kundalini energy is visualized as a
coiled serpent, which resides at the base of the spine, until something—
something in our practices, or something in the course of our evolution—causes
it to begin to uncoil and to rise up the subhuman. As it does, it encounters each
of the chakras.
The first chakra, the Tuladhar (which is at the base of the spine, halfway
between the anal sphincter and the genitals) is primarily connected with survival
functions. The second chakra, svadishtana, is the sexual chakra. The third
chakra, which is called Manipur, is located in the area around the mid-section,
at the solar plexus; it’s thought to be connected with expressions of ego-power.
The fourth chakra is called the Anaheim, or the heart chakra, and it’s related to
compassion. The fifth chakra, the Buddha, located in the throat, is connected
with turning inward toward God, and therefore with the development of the “true
voice,” the divine sound speaking through us. The sixth chakra, which is the
Anna, is located in the center of the forehead; it is usually called the third-eye
chakra, and it is connected with the inner guru and the higher wisdom. And
finally the seventh chakra, the Sahara, at the crown of the head, is the
thousand-petaled lotus, enlightenment, the merging into Brahman.
As the Kundalini energy uncoils itself up the spine, it passes through each of
those chakras in turn, through the focus of each form of energy. The Kundalini
radiates out from the subhuman at each chakra level, and it energizes, or
activates, each of those physical/psychological energy fields. But if, as the
Kundalini begins to rise, it comes to a center which is blocked, the energy will
emerge as some form of behavior. It’s like water going up a tube; if it gets to a
crimp in the tube, it can’t go up any further. Say the energy gets to the second
chakra; the name for the second chakra, which is the sexual chakra, translates as
“her favorite resort”—referring to the Kundalini. It’s sort of like the Riviera of
the chakra-world; the Kundalini gets there and decides to hang out and vacation
for a while. Or maybe it manages to dodge that shoal, but then it gets to the third
chakra, and it gets grabbed by all the ego’s power needs, and it can’t go any
further.
In the real world, the process isn’t as neat and orderly as all that makes it
sound, however. It’s not like you finish with the first chakra, now you go on to
the second. . . You finish with the second and go on to the third, and so on.
Everybody’s got a little of everything going all the time, more blocked in this
chakra, less blocked in that one. As you get more sophisticated about the chakra
systems, you begin to assess your own predicament in terms of the movement of
the Kundalini—you’ll say: “Well, a lot of my energy is still tied up in my second
chakra, but my fourth chakra is beginning to open.”
I’ve worked some with the energies of the chakra system, and sometimes
when I’m sitting and talking to somebody, suddenly what I see is a living chakra
chart, right there in front of me. I see the various chakras, all sending out energy:
“BZT, BZT, BZT”—like “lust, lust, lust,” or “power, power, power,” or
“compassion, compassion, compassion.” Or maybe I’ll see that nothing’s
coming through the heart chakra, but the third eye is like a headlight beam.
The Kundalini gets awakened in many different ways. Swami Muktananda had
the capacity to give shakiest, a direct hit of energy that would awaken the
Kundalini. It would have the strangest effects on people. Suddenly somebody
would get up and start to dance—somebody you’d never have expected to
behave that way: a rotund gentleman in a conservative blue serge suit, for
example, who got up and started to do an incredible Indian dance. And the man
sitting next to him, who looked like a professor, with his tweed jacket and the
pipe in his mouth, who suddenly started to do Madras—complex, exquisite,
perfect Madras—but the look on his face was one of total perplexity. Somebody
else would be doing automatic breathing and bouncing across the floor like a
beach ball. The whole place would begin to look like the back ward of a mental
hospital.
All the while, Swami Muktananda would just be sitting up there, with his eyes
closed, playing his extra. But his presence was like a beam of energy, activating
the Kundalini, the energy centers, in all the people around him. The shakiest—
his giving of Shakti—caused the Kundalini to begin to uncoil, and depending on
where the chakras were blocked, the energy came out in different behavioral
manifestations. Block a little of it here and some more of it there, and that
combination will make you get up and dance. Some other combination will
cause automatic breathing. If you understand the system, you can keep score of
who’s got which chakra-thing going.
If you’re drawn toward working with energy systems, you might decide to
explore working with these chakra energies. There are different ways to do it.
You can try doing it through meditation, for example—you can visualize
bringing the energies up through each of the chakras, and out through the crown
of your head. Or you might want to work with another type of visualization
exercise, like a mandala from Tibetan traditions. In some other traditions you
might be given a specific mantra, a “big” or seed-sound, for opening a certain
chakra. You can use Panama, a method which works with breath control to
move the energy from chakra to chakra. Each of those is a technique that works
in a specific way to awaken the Kundalini energy. You can try them out,
experiment with them; you can see how they affect the chakra energies, and how
that jibes with your other spiritual practices.
G. THE YOGA OF PSYCHEDELICS
First off, I want to say that I would never recommend to anyone that they use
psychedelics as a means to alter their consciousness. But if someone comes to
me and says, “I’m going to take this,” then I say to them, “I think you should
study and understand something about the method you’re about to use, so you
can enter it in the spirit of its being a yoga for you, a path toward union.”
The predicament we face at the moment is that most psychedelic substances
are currently illegal. When people ask me what I think about government policy
toward psychedelics, I always respond that the most reasonable thing to do about
substances which alter human consciousness is to educate people, not to police
them. It makes very good sense to prepare people for a psychedelic experience,
maybe even to license them, the way you do before you let someone drive a
vehicle. But you shouldn’t prohibit anyone from using whatever substances they
choose. You respect the right of other beings to alter and to explore their own
consciousness in their own way. That ought to be basic human freedom.
At the moment, however, it isn’t. And so if we use psychedelics, it will be in
an atmosphere in which we can’t really fulfill Maharajah’s criterion of “feeling
much peace.” In our minds there will be the inevitable paranoia that comes from
working with something that is illegal; that means there is always a certain little
part of our consciousness which has to be held down to “watch out for the fuzz,”
to put it in the vernacular. That’s why if we are using psychedelics, it’s good to
have someone available to take care of the scene on the physical plane, so we
can relax and concentrate on doing our inner work.
In thinking about psychedelics, the first thing to understand is that there is a
whole range of substances which share that name, and that they are of very
different strengths. Some are mild; most marijuana, for example, falls in that
category. Mild psychedelics open up the possibilities, but they don’t override the
personality. Stronger psychedelics, on the other hand—things like mescaline, or
psilocybin, or LSD—are likely to override our existing thought patterns in a very
powerful way. If we aren’t prepared for that, it can get pretty hairy. If we don’t
have a sufficiently deep Nana practice, some understanding of what’s happening
to us, we freak when the entire structure of our existence starts to fall away.
That’s why it’s important to do some reading and studying and contemplating in
advance, so we’ll have some foothold in the experiences as they start to happen
to us.
Those of us who have experienced psychedelic trips know that there are two
points in the session where problems can arise. The first is going up, when we
find the world and ourselves in it dissolving all around us. That’s the Kansas
motel trip I described: “Help, I’m dying!”
The other point that can be freaky is the re-entry, when we start to come back, and we see what a schlock scene we’re returning to. That can send us into a
tailspin, as we try to run away from our lives and hang on to the high. Usually,
however, once we come down, those are exactly the experiences that motivate us
to clean up our act. It’s just part of the process of seeing the horror show we
have created for ourselves, out of our ignorance, and it becomes the inducement
for doing the practices of purification and all the rest of it. Then we can be a
little more open the next time around.
It’s extremely useful, especially with a first session, to have someone on hand
who is very experienced, someone quiet and calm, someone with whom you feel
loving and safe. If that’s not possible, try to have something else, like some
music that you love and can surrender into, something that is familiar and
comfortable. And always take a psychedelic in a place where there’s minimal
paranoia and where you can trust that you won’t be disturbed.
Be open in your heart to each moment, and only do what feels totally right.
Let’s say you and some friends have a psychedelic session planned for Saturday
night; everybody’s already, but there’s a feeling inside you that says, “No—for
some reason, this isn’t right.” Trust that feeling. Wait. Wait until the moment
feels absolutely “right on.” Listen carefully to your own heart; if you feel that
using psychedelics seems to be part of your practice, then use them, but use them
very consciously.
Notes
Backward and Foreword
1. This and other quoted information about the workshop was taken from a copy
of the program for the Europa 1974 Summer Session, generously provided by
Richard Chamberlain of the Communications Department at Naropa University.
Introduction
1. Jakob Böhme, The Confessions of Jakob Böhme, edited by W. S. Palmer
(1954).
2. Air, Songs of Air, translated by Rabindranath Tagore (1915).
3. Thomas Merton, A Search for Wisdom and Spirit:Thomas Merton’s Theology
of the Self, edited by Anne E. Carr (1989).
4. Peter Suspense, The Psychology of Man’s Possible Evolution (1945).
Chapter 2: Karma and Reincarnation
1. Rum, The Pocket Rum Reader, edited by Air Helsinki (2001).
2. Jack London, Star-Rover (1915).
3. Lama Angara Dorinda, quoted in the foreword to The Tibetan Book of the
Dead, by W. Y. Evans-Went (foreword by Donald Lopez) (2000).
4. The Buddha, The Words of the Buddha (An Outline of the Teachings of the
Buddha in the Words of the Pale Canon), compiled by Nyanatiloka (undated).
Chapter 3: Karma Yoga
1. Platinum, The Six Enneads, translated by Stephen McKenna and B. S. Page
(1991).
2. Master Eckhart, The Essential Sermons, Commentaries, Treatises and
Defense, translated and edited by Bernard McGinn and Edmund College (1981).
3. Mohandas Gandhi, The Gospel of Selfless Action, or The Rita According to
Gandhi (1946–2000).
4. Carlos Castaneda, Journey to Indian: The Lessons of Don Juan (1972).
5. The Book of Tao, translated by R. B. Blarney (1955).
6. Meter Baba, Is That So? (1978).
Chapter 4: Nana Yoga
1. Gurdjieff quoted in P. D. Suspense, In Search of the Miraculous: Frag
mention an Unknown Teaching (1974).
2. Ramona Maharishi, in his poem “Reality in 40 Verses (and Supplement)” in
The Collected Works of Ramona Maharishi, edited by Arthur Osborne (1972).
Chapter 5: Brahman
1. Ganesha, Janeshwari (a thirteenth-century commentary on the Rita), quoted
at www.sscnet.ucla.edu/southasia/Religions/texts/Janesh.htm.
2. Rum, quoted at www.iranonline.com/literature/Articles/Persian-
literature/Rum.
3. Ramona Maharishi, The Collected Works of Ramona Maharishi, edited by
Arthur Osborne (1972).
4. Franklin Merrill Wolfe, Consciousness Without an Object (1973).
Chapter 6: Sacrifice and Mantra
1. P. D. Suspense, In Search of the Miraculous: Fragments of an Unknown
Teaching (1974).
2. The Way of a Pilgrim and The Pilgrim Continues His Way, translated by
Helen Bacon (1985).
Chapter 7: Renunciation and Purification
1. Mohandas Gandhi, Epigrams from Gandhi, compiled by S. R. Linear.
2. Mohandas Gandhi, “The Rita According to Gandhi,” in a translation which
appeared in the columns of Young India on June 8, 1931.
Chapter 8: Devotion and the Guru
1. Hafiz of Shiraz, Divan-y-Hafiz, edited by Mira Mohammad Mazzini and Dr.
ASEM Ghana (1941).
2. For Love of the Dark One: Songs of Mirabeau, translated by Andrew Schelling
(1993).
3. Ramona Maharishi, Spiritual Instruction of Bhagavān Sri Ramona Maharishi
(1974).
4. Swami Muktananda, Play of Consciousness: A Spiritual Autobiography
(1978).
Chapter 10: Dying
1. Ramona Maharishi, The Collected Works of Ramona Maharishi, edited by
Arthur Osborne (1972).
2. Zen Flesh, Zen Bones, compiled by Paul Reps and Neogen Sendai (1994).
Glossary
Abhidhamma The section of Theravada Buddhist scripture concerned with
philosophical, cosmological, and psychological analysis.
Adharma / Amharic Unrighteous conduct. Failure to perform spiritual duty or
to act from the Truth within one’s heart.
Shankara The false belief in individuality. This Illness or I-maker is the source
of egoism, the root cause of dualism.
AHIMA Non-harming in deeds, words, and thoughts. One who does not have
compassion for others, including all life-forms, is in some way harming them.
One of the FAMAS.
Ananda Absolute bliss.
Aparigraha Non-covetousness, non-acquiring, non-attachment. To accept only
that which is absolutely necessary in deed, word, and thought. One of the FAMAS.
Arti A ritual performed to show reverence to a deity. A holy person moves
clockwise around an image of the deity while chanting and carrying a tray
containing a lamp/candle, camphor, and other items such as sacred ash, Quasi
leaves, flowers.
Arti lamp The flame carried during an art ceremony. The flame symbolizes
both the embodiment of the deity and the deity’s transcendence of bodily form.
Asana(s) Literally “seat.” A posture that is stable and comfortable. One of the
eight limbs of Astana yoga.
Ashram(a) A spiritually based residence or retreat site where yoga is lived and
taught; Often, an ashram is founded in honor of a particular spiritual master.
Also, a stage of life; human life has four “ashrams: student, householder,
spiritual seeker, ascetic.
Ashtanga yoga A physical discipline to synchronize the breath with postures to
balance the body and calm the mind. The “eight-liter” yoga: Rama, Nyasa,
Asana, Panama, pratyahara, Havana, Dayana, and Sarah.
Asteya Non-stealing. Not taking what does not belong to oneself. One of the
FAMAS.
Atman The spark or breath of the Divine in all beings.
Alachua An incarnate being who lives in a state beyond body consciousness.
An ascetic who enjoys liberation and supernatural powers.
Avatar The highest form an entity can attain and still incarnate. The incarnation
of a deity, such as Rama, Krishna, Christ, Zoroaster, or Buddha.
Bardo Literally “island.” The state between death and rebirth.
Bhakti The yoga of devotion. (“The way Shakti works—you just love until you
and the Beloved become one.” —Ram Days) which An individual devoted to
the task of following the path by renunciation of the distractions of worldly
affairs.
Bhutan Maya Offering food to birds and animals as a spiritual practice.
Brahma Maya Surrendering oneself to the Divine, especially through the study
of religious texts and ideas.
Brahmacharya The practice of chastity. The spiritual student who is practicing
impeccable behavior, including chastity. One of the FAMAS.
Brahman The inconceivable, the inexpressible, the indescribable. The principle
of illumination by which all phenomena, without exception, emanate and to
which all return. Ultimate reality.
Buddhi The reasoning and discriminating faculty of the mind. Functions
independent of the senses, and therefore is able to clarify and control them.
Chakra(s) One of seven energy vortices or nerve plexuses along the astral spinal
column. Each chakra has a physical and emotional counterpart.
Chit Absolute knowledge.
Darshan Receiving a glimpse of Truth from being in the presence of a holy
person, sacred idol, or sacred place.
Dharana Concentration on a single object.
Dharma/dharma The bases of all universal order, social and moral. Conformity
to natural righteousness or spiritual duty.
Dhyana Meditation or contemplation.
Dokusan In the Zen Buddhist tradition, a private interview with one’s teacher.
Dorje The thunderbolt in art and ritual that symbolizes the method of using
something invincible that can cut through anything.
Entheogens From the Greek, enters, meaning “God within.” Often called
psychedelics. Use of these substances (e.g., peyote, ayahuasca, cannabis, etc.)
Permits temporary freedom from the perception of reality created by the rational
mind.
Ghee Clarified butter. It represents abundance and fertility, often used as a ritual
offering.
Guna(s) In Hindu philosophy, literally, “threads or strands.” The three inherent
characteristics or qualities of nature: sativa (truth/purity), rajas (energy/passion),
and Tamás (inertia/illusion).
Gyan(a) The yoga of intellectual introspection and discernment. The goal is
toward mind control.
Hatha yoga The path of body control and discipline. Includes the breath and
postures.
Ida The left Nazi (stream of energy) that runs along the subhuman (the astral
spinal column that carries the Kundalini energy). It is feminine, watery in nature,
cool, and soothing. See pin gala.
Indrias The powers of the senses (hear, feel, see, taste, smell) and the powers of
action (voice, hand, foot, organ of excretion, organ of generation).
Ishtar Dev A “chosen deity” or personal God who protects and assists the
devotee on the Path. (“Hangman is Maharani’s Ishtar Dev, his route through.”
—Ram Days) Japan Devotional repetition of a mantra, a prayer, or names of God.
Java/Jonathan The incarnate individualized Self. The soul identifies with its
manifested or incarnate state.
Jnana yoga The path of knowledge and wisdom arrived at through inquiry and
discrimination.
Kalpa In Hindu chronology, 4,320,000,000 years. The length of a day and night
of Brahman.
Karma Literally, “action.” This includes not only one’s actions this lifetime, but
throughout all lifetimes. It is the fuel of samsara. The karmic principle of cause
and effect is not a system of reward and punishment outside ourselves, rather it
is a natural law maintaining the balance of the universe.
Karma yoga The path of action. The practice of consciously using one’s daily
life and work as a spiritual path while relinquishing attachment to the fruits of
the actions.
Kaya A form or body. The body of dharma is the dharma kaya.
Koan An unsolvable riddle used as a meditation practice in some schools of Zen
Buddhism. (“The mind using itself to beat itself.” — Ram Days) Kshatriya One
of the four social classes of Aryan clans in India: Brahmin (learned), Kshatriya
(warrior), valley (merchant), and Sudra (laborer). Kshatriya is the fighter of the
senses and protector of people. Arjuna is a Kshatriya.
Lila Divine play; reality seen as God-at-play.
Loka Other realms or dimensions than the physical world.
Manas The lower mind. The rational faculty of the mind which has a dual role as
a sense organ and an organ of action. Through manas, impressions from the
external world are received (sense) and conscious and creative responses are
given (action).
Mantra Rhythmic repetition of words or phrases that support an individual’s
inner journey. A method of silencing the mind. Om is the supreme mantra.
Mauna Spiritual silence.
Mauni A sadhu who uses silence as an pay.
Maya Literally, “illusion.” The flux that underlies everything that is created and
dissolved (the phenomenal world). That which diverts humans from Spirit
(Reality) to matter (unreality).
Murti The manifestation of sacred power or a deity in the form of an icon, often
a statue.
Namaste A verbal greeting, often with palms held together at the heart center,
meaning I honor the divinity in you. (“I honor the place in you where, when you
are resting in yours, and I am resting in mine, there is only one of us.” —Ram
Days) Nirvana / nirvana Liberation from material existence. The transcendental
freedom that stands as the final goal of the Buddha’s teachings. Unconditional
wisdom, unlimited awareness.
Nivritti To flow back. Involution, away from activity. Opposed to Pavarotti,
evolution.
Niyama(s) The internal disciplines of Astana yoga: Sacha (purity of mind and
body), Santosh (contentment), tapas (self-discipline), svadhyaya (devotion and
spiritual study), and Hara Gandhara (surrender, union with the Divine).
NRI Maya Offerings to guests or to the needy (such as food to the hungry) given
as a spiritual act or practice.
Pingala The right Nazi (stream of energy) that runs along the subhuman (the
astral spinal column which carries the Kundalini energy). It is masculine, fiery in
nature, hot, and stimulating. See Ida.
Pitch Maya Offering oblations, usually of water and rice, to the dead, especially
ancestors.
Prakriti Nature; phenomenal world. Oneness manifests as Purus (spirit) and
Prakrit. Prakrit is part of the Divine Being, not subordinate to it.
Pralaya Periodic cosmic dissolution marking the end of an age. When all forms
merge into one indiscriminate whole.
Pranam To bow down to show respect, especially to a sadhu.
Pranayama Regulation of the breath to control prank, or the life force of the
body. Used in yoga and meditation for cleansing the body and concentrating the
mind.
Pratyahara Withdrawal of senses from objects to still the mind. One of the eight
limbs of Astana yoga.
Pravritti To flow forth. Evolution, toward sense stimulus. Opposed to nitrite,
involution.
Psychotropic A substance that can influence human consciousness, changing the
functioning of the mind.
Punya Right understanding. To act mindfully.
Purusha Spirit. Pure consciousness. Oneness manifests as Purus and Prakrit
(phenomenal world).
Raja yoga The “royal” path. The mind becomes the instrument of the soul.
Rajas/basic Energy. Action, stimulation of desires. One of the guns.
Ram Nam Satya Hey The Hindu mantra that accompanies bringing the body of
a deceased person to the Ganges River during funeral rites. Often heard in
Bananas (Varanasi).
Ramayana Literally, the vehicle of Rama. Composed by the sage Valid, the
Ramayana is the oldest known Sanskrit epic poem of India. The adventures of
the avatar Rama and his consort Site with the demon Havana. The Ramayana
brings to life the eternal struggle between the impersonal laws of nature and
dharma.
Roche Literally, “precious One.” A title of honor given to Talks and others
of high spiritual attainment.
Rohatsu die session A Zen tradition of intense meditation practice. For the first
eight days of December, continuous meditation with breaks for surreys, eating,
and sleeping.
Sadhak A spiritual aspirant of God or Truth doing Sahara.
Sadhana(s) From the verb root sad, meaning “to go straight to the goal.”
Spiritual way or spiritual disciplines that ultimately create evolutionary energy
for all beings.
Sadhu A holy person, saint, or sage.
Samadhi Concentration, absorption, unification. The person and the object of
meditation merge. Total absorption of body, mind, soul, and spirit into the One
Reality. Oneness, ecstasy.
Samsara Literally, “to circle.” The bondage of the repetitious cycle of birth,
death, and rebirth initiated by one’s karma (actions in each lifetime).
Sankhya A Hindu school of philosophy focusing study on the human body and
soul.
Sat Truth Absolute Being. Beyond duality.
Satori In the Zen Buddhist tradition, “direct perception.” This experience may
vary from a flash of intuitive awareness to nirvana. It is the beginning and not
the end of Zen training.
Sattva/static Ritually pure. Being in a state of tranquility or purity. One of the
guns.
Satya Truthfulness.
Sesshin A period of intense meditation practice.
Seva Service without attachment to the fruits of one’s labor. (“God serving God
—puts it into a loving space.” —Ram Days) shaped yoga The yoga of working
with the inner sound.
Shakti The feminine principle of Divine energy or power. Recognition of one’s
own inner power.
Siddhi From side, “to attain.” Supernatural or hidden powers inherent in the
human spirit attained through mantra, meditation, and other yogic practices.
Siddhi baba A perfected yogi who has mastered the eight Sindhi: the power to
become infinitely small (anima), infinitely large (maxima), light (Mafia),
heavy (Karima), to create (Oshawa), command (Harshitha), reach anywhere
(Pratt), and gratify any wish (Panama).
Sila Purification, morality, virtue.
Skandas The causal and impermanent elements inherent in all forms of life.
There are five elements (stands) creating the personality and temporal nature of
humans: RPA (form), Vedanta (sensation), Santa (perception), Sankara
(reactions), and Vienna (consciousness).
Stupa Literally, “crest, top, summit.” The monument built over the ashes or
relics of a spiritual master.
Sunnyas A enunciate. One who has renounced the world for a life of solitude
and meditation.
Sushumna The astral spinal column, where the chakras ascend and where the
Kundalini energy is carried.
Swaha Invocation used during offerings to spiritual deities. Has the intent of “So
be it!”
Svayamvara The Indian ceremony when the princess chooses her own husband.
Tapasya/tapas Self-discipline and austerity to achieve progress in spiritual
growth.
Theravada Buddhism: Literally, “the Way of the Elders.” A council of five
hundred elders committed the Buddha’s teachings from oral tradition to written
form. From this text, the Pale Canon, Theravada Buddhism draws its spiritual
inspiration. It is the predominant school of Buddhism in Southeast Asia, and is
often referred to as Southern Buddhism. Since the nineteenth century it has
spread across Europe and North America.
Tucket A low bed or platform made from planks used by some of the holy beings
in India.
Talk(s) A sage who has chosen to reincarnate, rather than accept nirvana, to be
available to spiritual seekers.
Upanishads Literally, “to be close-by devotedly.” One of the most important
Hindu spiritual texts. The Upanishads, along with the Arawakan and
Brahmana's, are the principal commentaries on the Vedas and on Hindu scriptural
ideas. The central teaching is that the Self is the same as Brahman.
Upaya A way or path. Any means or method used to achieve spiritual awareness.
Vasana(s) Self-limitation caused from memories (habits or conditioning) that
can prevent enlightenment. Awareness of these memories can be used to
progress.
Vedas Literally, “wisdom.” The ancient sacred writings of India which form the
heart of Hindu scripture. The Vedas were composed beginning in 2000 B.C. The
four Vedas (also called the Summits) are the Rig-Veda, the Saavedra, the
Yajur Veda, and the Atharva Veda.
Richard ATM “Who am I?” A practice of self-inquiry, taught and practiced by
Ramona Maharishi.
Visuddhimagga A fifth-century work on Theravada Buddhist doctrine.
Translated into English by Shikoku Nanomole. Visuddhimagga, the title, is also a
phrase meaning “the Path of Purification.”
Rama(s) One of the external disciplines: AHIMA (non-harming), Satya
(truthfulness), assay (non-stealing), brahmacharya (chastity), and aparigraha
(non-covetousness).
Yoga(s) Literally, to yoke or join. The way to or the union of the soul with the
Ultimate Reality. Includes meditation, breath control, postures, right behavior,
devotion, etc.
yoga An age in Hindu chronology lasting 432,000 years. There are four Yumas in
each cycle of creation: Satya or Krita Yoga (Truth or Golden Age), with
emphasis on meditation; Treat Yoga (Silver Age), sacrifices; Avalara Yoga
(Bronze Age), worship of deities; and the present Kali Yoga (Dark or Iron Age),
chanting of Holy Names. The Kali age began in 3102 B.C. and is the fourth yoga
of this cycle.
Zazen “Just sitting” method of meditation in Zen Buddhism.
Zendo In the Zen Buddhist tradition, a place used to practice taken.
Resources
An extensive resources guide has been compiled to help you get started with
practices that have been introduced in this book. The guide is too long to include
here, but it is available online at www.RamDassTapes.org. It is a compendium
of information about books, tapes, CDs, videos, and websites, relating not only
to the teachers and teachings that have been mentioned, but to Hinduism and
Hindu philosophy in general. Please visit the site and make use of the wealth of
information it offers.
Here are a few of the more important resources directly related to the Rita.
Books
The Bhagavad Gita. Introduction and translation by Juan Mascara, Penguin
Group, 1962.
Bhagavad Gita. Translated by Swami Prabhavananda and Christopher
Isherwood, Barnes & Noble Books, 1995.
The Bhagavad Gita: A New Translation. Stephen Mitchell, Three Rivers Press,
2002.
The Bhagavad Gita. Translation and introduction by Eliot Deutsche, Holt,
Reinhart and Winston, 1968.
Jnaneshwari. Interpretation and commentary of the Bhagavad Gita by the
thirteenth-century poet-saint Jnaneshwar, George Allen and Unwin Publishers.
Illuminations from the Bhagavad Gita. Kim and Chris Murray, Mandala
Publishing Group, 1998.
Ethics of the Bhagavad Gita. Swami Savanna. Why the Rita was taught on a
battlefield and more, Divine Life Society, 1995.
The Rita Vision. Swami Chimamanda. Pithy exposition on the first three chapters
of the Bhagavad Gita, Divine Life Society.
The Song Celestial. Ramona Maharishi’s selected verses from the Bhagavad Gita.
Sri Niranjanananda Swami, 1951.
Spiritual Heritage of India. Swami Prabhavananda. Comprehensive history of
India’s philosophy and religions; discusses the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Rita,
the six systems of Indian philosophy. Sri Ramakrishna Math.
Electronic
http://eawc.evansville.edu/inpage.htm. A wealth of information on the historical
context of the Rita and the Rita’s relation to Indian religious thought.
www.geocities.com/somsram. A valuable site on the Rita, with discourses,
interpretation, and verses and chanting of slogan in audio.
www.onlinedarshan.com. Entire text can be read online: Ramayana, Vedas,
Upanishads, Purana's, and the Bhagavad Gita. Also, Goswami Tulsidas’s life
story and teachings.
Organizations
International/American Rita Society. Offers free distribution of the Rita to
hospitals, libraries, and other public entities; entire Rita for online reading;
support and guidance in establishing Rita discussion groups; free
correspondence courses. www.gitasociety.com, or 511 Lowell Place, Fremont,
CA 94536.
NOTE: CDs and cassette tape recordings of the “Yoga's of the Bhagavad Gita”
lectures from which this book was drawn are available from the Ram Days Tape
Library Foundation (www.RamDassTapes.org).
1 K. K. was a lifelong devotee of Need Karol Baba, and
he was present when Ram Days first met Maharajah. It
was to K. K.’s home in Capital that Ram Days was taken
following that first meeting.
2 Ultimately, the school bus wound up parked at the
Lama Foundation, a spiritual community in the
mountains outside of Tao's, New Mexico, where it housed
the community’s sole telephone and was used as office
space for the Lama staff. In a fierce forest fire which
swept through Lama in 1996, the bus was one of the few
structures that was not totally destroyed; however, the
side of the bus that had faced the fire was burned black,
while the other side was scorched—an interesting
symbolic close to its story.
About the Author
Ram Days has served on the faculty at Stanford and Harvard Universities. Since
1968, he has pursued a variety of spiritual practices, including guru Krita,
devotional yoga, meditation, and Sufi and Jewish studies.
Books by Ram Days
Identification and Child Rearing (Richard Alpert) with R. Sears and L. Ran
(Stanford University Press, early 1960s) The Psychedelic Experience (Richard
Alpert) with Timothy Leary and Ralph Metzger (University Books, 1964) LSD
(Richard Alpert) with S. Cohen and L. Schiller (New American Library, 1966) Be
Here Now (Lama Foundation; Crown Books, 1971)
The Only Dance There Is (Anchor Books, 1974)
Grist for the Mill with Stephen Levine (Unity Press, 1976; new edition by
Celestial Arts, 1987) Journey of Awakening (Bantam Books, 1978)
Miracle of Love (Dutton, 1979; new edition by Hangman Foundation, 1996)
How Can I Help? With Paul Gorman (Alfred Knopf, 1985) Compassion in
Action with Mirabeau Bush (Bell Tower, 1992) Still Here: Embracing Aging,
Changing and Dying (River head Books, 2000) One-Liners: A Mini-Manual for
a Spiritual Life (Bell Tower, 2002) Paths to God: Living the Bhagavad Gita
(Harmony, 2004)
What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about
this author.
Sign up now.