Transcribed from: polishingthemirror.pdf
Method used: pdfplumber
==================================================

How to Live from Your Spiritual
Heart
Ram Days
with Ramesh war Was
Conceived by Janeiro Sandy Goal
Dedicated to Need Karol Baba
This book is a pale reflection of your light,
the flicker of a candle compared to the sun.
Taking the pollen-like dust of my Guru’s lotus feet
to polish the mirror of my heart,
I can now sing the pure splendor of Sri RAM, the best of Rafts,
which bestows the four fruits of life.
I don’t know anything, so I remember you, Son of the Wind;
grant me strength, intelligence, and wisdom,
and remove my impurities and sorrows.
INVOCATION TO “HANGMAN CHALÍA,” TRANSLATION BY KRISHNA
DAS, FROM FLOW OF GRACE
Contents
Fast Foreword by Ramesh war Was
Being Here Now
INTRODUCTION
Practice Makes Perfect
The Road Home
The Guru, Remover of Darkness
Nowhere to Go
Simple Truth
Polishing the Mirror
CHAPTER 1
Mind Fields
You Can’t Know It; You Can Only Be It
Beyond Thought
Lose Your Mind to Gain Your Soul
Enlightening Up
Watching the Watcher
Breathing In, Breathing Out
A Guided Visual Meditation
Shakti Yoga, The Path of Devotion
CHAPTER 2
How Do I Love Thee?
Love Is a State of Being
Guru Krita (The Guru’s Grace)
Divine Relationships
Maharajah
The Feeling of Devotion
Hangman, Devoted Servant of RAM
Karma Yoga, Living in the World
CHAPTER 3
Your Karma Is Your Dharma
Witnessing Your Own Mellow Drama
It’s All in the Family
Relationships and Emotions
Truth Will Set You Free
Working With Your Emotions
I’d Rather Be Than Be Right
Faith, No Fear—No Faith, Fear
Spiritual Family and Friends
Aging and Changing
CHAPTER 4
Cultural Attitudes on Aging
Dealing with Change
Aging Gracefully
Free to Be
Letting Go. . . Again
Being with What Is
Conscious Living, Conscious Dying
CHAPTER 5
Dealing with Fear
Dealing with Pain
What Dies?
Being with Someone Dying
Conscious Dying
Grieving
Death Is a Reminder to Live Life Fully
From Suffering to Grace
CHAPTER 6
Why Is There Suffering?
The Way of Grace
Changing Your Point of View
Is It Suffering or Is It Grace?
Faith
It’s All Perfect
Giving Caring
Taking Care of Dad
Seeing Beyond Suffering
How Can We Help?
Compassion
Content to Be
CHAPTER 7
Beach Day
Getting Hip
Roles to Souls
Just a Moment, Please!
All You Need Is. . .
Meditation: I Am Loving Awareness
Being Love Now
The Wheel of Illusion
Practicing
CHAPTER 8
Making a Sacred Space
Morning Practice
The Daily Now
Meditation
Silence
Blessing Food
Kiran
Pilgrimages
Retreat
Words from Realized Beings
Listening to Your Self
Notes
Acknowledgments
About the Author and Coauthor
Other Work by Ram Days
About Sounds True
Copyright
Fast Foreword
THE YEAR RAM DAYS’S Be Here Now was first published, 1971,
was a turbulent time. The Vietnam War was provoking a backlash
of protests. Ebullient waves from psychedelic drugs, acid rock,
newfound sexual freedom, feminism, environmentalism, and back-
to-the-land hippie communes were creating tectonic shifts in the
existential landscape. The psychedelic expansion of consciousness
began crossbreeding with Buddhism, Hinduism, and New Age
spirituality to offer glimmers of internal liberation.
Idealistic visions were soon tempered by experience. There
were good trips and bad trips. Deaths of students at Kent State and
of rock ’n’ roll heroes Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, and Jim
Morrison were sobering shocks. Woodstock was over. The big
party woke up the morning after, smelling the coffee and needing
to get on with it, laying the foundations for real change.
Richard Alpert had been Timothy Leary’s professorial
colleague and psychedelic sidekick at Harvard, which fired them
both in 1963. After Harvard, they ran a counterculture
Exploratorium at Mill brook in upstate New York. In 1966, Alpert,
the consummate psychedelic psychologist, went to India. He
returned as Ram Days, a Western yogi, and soon became a Johnny
Appleseed of Eastern spirituality throughout the West.
After a second sojourn in India, from 1970 to 1972, Ram Days
again went on the road, lecturing tirelessly for two and a half
decades. Over and over, he conveyed, with humor and stories and
quotes, a shift from the Western achievement model of “making it
happen” and “just doing it” to quieting the mind and being at the moment, being present and attentive and loving—just being. Going
radically beyond his previous experiences, he described and
manifested in himself a different state of being, transmitted from
his guru in India. Some spiritual seeds sprouted. Thousands of
people got the message and changed their lives in response.
The publication of his handcrafted manual of transcendence, Be
Here Now, interjected a new note into the cacophonous cultural
conversation of the ’70s. Produced at a commune of graphic artists
in the mountains of northern New Mexico and printed on brown
wrapping paper, it was more graphic novel and artwork than text.
When Be Here Now came out as a book, it was a powerful
statement of this new way of being. Suddenly, out in the
mainstream publishing world, there was this hand-hewn, counter-cultural owner’s manual for consciousness.
It caught on. People passed it around to their friends, and it
became a New Age bible. The message of Be Here Now was like a
pebble dropped into the cultural pool of consciousness, and it
continues to ripple out in contemporary lingo, yoga culture, in
names of radio shows like NPR’s Here and Now, in a stream of
New Age literature flowing all over the spiritual map.
Be Here Now was not just a media phenomenon but part of a
cultural shift in consciousness. More people now identify with
eclectic nondenominational spirituality. Aging baby boomers are
dealing more openly with life and death. Yoga has gone from being
an exotic Eastern import to a transnational subculture. In the
Internet age, being here now transcends time and space; we dwell
entwined in a virtual moment. As we journey together through
space on blue-marble earth, planetary awareness grows and
separations dissolve. As Ram Days would say, “Them is becoming
us.”
For millions of us, Be Here Now opened doors to our deeper
selves, clarifying and calming the tumult of insight and upheaval
and helping many of us take the first step on the pilgrimage into
our own heart. Since the ’60s, the winding way of inner exploration
has led us around many bends and up some blind alleys. The inner
vision continues to pull, and we continue to follow.
Be Here Now shifted our point of view from whatever we
thought was going on to seeing life as a spiritual journey. A section
of it, the “Cookbook for a Spiritual Life,” gave practical recipes for
spiritual practice and yoga for Westerners. The simple message
was, “Now that you’ve seen the light, this is how to live in it.” That
cookbook is still an essential resource, and the perennial
imperative of the book’s cryptic title remains: just be completely
present at the moment. Just be.
The process of clearing our mind-fields of clutter and
attachment in order to just be here now is complex and daunting.
It’s a multilevel game. As soon as you focus on one part of the
jigsaw puzzle of your consciousness, something else that’s even
harder to deal with invariably grabs your attention. As Ram Days
says, “The mind is a wonderful servant, but a terrible master.”
In keeping with these many levels of mind and emotion, the
image of polishing the mirror is a multidimensional metaphor.
Consciousness itself is a hall of mirrors. The key quality of the
human soul is the ability to reflect on its own existence. Self-reflection, introspection, self-inquiry—whatever we call it—takes
us through many layers of the onion of our inner being, from our
most mundane, recursive thoughts to exalted states of pure
awareness and unconditional love, of oneness or God-
consciousness.
This internal reflection can also be seen as a process of
witnessing, or simply observing our own actions, thoughts, and
emotions with an attitude of tolerance and love. Witnessing helps
us to detach from the external phenomena and sensory experiences,
as well as from our mental narratives, our personal story lines that
so thoroughly occupy our attention.
Witnessing subtly shifts how we identify ourselves. We shift
from being the protagonist of our personal narrative, captivated by
the tumult of our thoughts and experiences, to seeing those
thoughts and experiences as phenomena reflected in the calm
mirror of our inner being. From being the star of our own show, we
become an affectionate observer of the play.
Alongside this shift in the locus of our inner identity there is a
process of external reflection, as we see our inner being reflected
and projected onto every experience of the outer world. With
patient spiritual practice, we can bring our external experience into
ever-closer alignment with our inner being. This is yoga—not just
yoga of the body, but also yoga of the mind (Nana yoga), yoga of
the heart (Shakti yoga), and the yoga of selfless action (karma
yoga).
As the veils of illusion begin to become more transparent, as we
recognize the limitation of identifying solely with thoughts and
experiences, with so-called objective reality, we begin to reflect a
purer state of being. Removing the dust of impurities and
attachments from the mirror of our heart-mind allows the light of
the spirit to be reflected. As the layers become more transparent,
the light shines through us, and we begin to dwell in a less content-laden, ever-clearer state of awareness. Awareness in the heart
flowers into love, compassion, and wisdom.
Polishing the mirror, this process of reflecting on ourselves by
witnessing and by bringing our external life into harmony with our
true being, resolves when we identify fully with our soul, and these
layers of being merged in our spiritual heart. Perhaps then there is a
further stage when we cease to experience ourselves as separate
beings, when the paradoxical relationship of subject and object
merges in oneness. That last step requires something we can only
call “grace.”
Having a guide or guru for this process of self-reflection can
provide us with the crucial feedback we need to stay focused and to
keep us from being distracted not only by our own mental detours,
but also by astral and other subtle planes. A true guru reflects our
innermost being, our true Self, because he or she lives in that
place. The guru’s loving awareness of our journey, at every level,
is an ever-present homing beacon on the path.
This book of Ram Days’s teachings is a toolkit to quiet the
mind, open the heart, and enter into oneness. These teachings offer
practical ways to be here now. Think of this book as a travel guide
for the path to nowhere (now-here), a how-to guide for finding that
precious sense of inner peace and spiritual reunion.
The methods are simple. The path is subtle. We are so close—
just a thought away!
Only you can know for yourself if polishing the mirror is
working. You’ll know if you become quieter inside, more loving
and compassionate, more peaceful and present, more content with
your life.
As with any kind of inner work, there are endless opportunities
for self-deception. The ego effortlessly morphs into a new,
spiritual ego: “Wow, I’m getting really spiritual!” Ram Days, with
his humor and his honesty about his own path and its pitfalls, is a
good model. May we treat ourselves with a degree of compassion
and patience equal to his, and not take ourselves too seriously.
There is, after all, nothing to be accomplished. We are just
allowing ourselves to be.
IN LOVE,
RAMESH DAS
Introduction
Being Here Now
sounds simple, but these three words contain inner
BEING HERE NOW
work for a lifetime. To live in the here and now is to have no
regrets about the past, no worries or expectations for the future. To
be fully present in each moment of existence is to live in total
contentment, in peace and love. To enter into this presence is to
reside in a different state of being, in a timeless moment, in the
eternal present.
Once you touch this state of pure being, you can never
completely forget it. You begin to see how your thoughts keep
carrying you away from being at the moment. But being is always
here, never more than a thought away. There’s nothing to do,
nothing to think about. Just be—here and now.
When our thinking mind subsides, what we might call our heart-mind takes over, and we can begin to live in love. Love is opening
to merge with another being, whether with another person or with
God (in the end they’re the same). Love is the doorway to oneness
with all things, to being in harmony with the entire universe. This
return to oneness, to a simplicity of just being, of unconditional
love, is what we all long for. This unified state is the real yoga, or
union.
Perhaps this book will provide a new perspective from which to
view your life. I hope you find living from this perspective a more
meaningful and transcendent way of being in the world. To be fully
present with ourselves and other beings is to focus on what is truly
important in life, and by doing so, we become more conscious and
loving.
PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT
Perhaps you are already an evolved soul who is separated from the
One only by the most gossamer of veils, and your enlightenment
will be nearly instantaneous. Or maybe you are a more tentative
seeker whose mind pulls you this way and that, and you need more
constant reminding of where your true Self lies. Whatever your
karmic situation is, may this primer of consciousness be a useful
road map to help guide you home. Home is where the heart is.
For most of us, it is helpful to set aside some time in each day
to devote to spiritual practice, which means scheduling time in our
already busy lives. The path of the heart is not hard or easy, but it
takes time and intention. Traditionally the best times are early
morning, while the world is still quiet, and during the evening, at
the close of the day’s activities.
Consider this your time to explore your own inner being, to find
more of the meaning of your life. Spiritual practice offers us a
chance to come back to the innate compassionate quality of our
heart and to our intuitive wisdom. Like shopping for a new set of
spiritual clothes, try on these practices of self-reflection, opening
the spiritual heart, or selfless service, and see what fits. Then take
a look in your mirror and see who you are now and what works for
you.
Each of us has our own path to follow, our own karma. You
have to honor your own unique path. You can’t imitate someone
else’s trip. Listen to your heart to hear what you yourself need,
take what you can use from these practices, and leave the rest.
THE ROAD HOME
In 1961, I was thirty and at the height of my academic career. I had
a PhD from Stanford University, and I was a professor of social
relations at Harvard. I had arrived at a pinnacle of life as I thought
it should be, professionally, socially, and economically. But inside
there remained an emptiness—a feeling that, with all I had,
something was still missing. Here I was at Harvard, the mecca of
the intellect. But when I looked into the eyes of my peers,
wondering “Do you know?” I saw in their eyes that what I was
looking for was nowhere to be found.
In a social or family setting, people looked up to me and hung
on my every word because I was a Harvard professor, and they
clearly assumed that I knew. But to me, the nature of life remained
a mystery. I had a lot of knowledge, but I lacked wisdom. In this
state of discontent, I filled my life with all the things I thought I
wanted and that were supposed to be culturally fulfilling. I ate and
drank too much. I collected material possessions and status
symbols: I had a Triumph motorcycle and a Cessna airplane. I
played the cello. I was sexually active. But these outer pleasures
weren’t giving me the answers I longed for. Deep inside, I had no
real sense of satisfaction or contentment.
Another psychologist, Timothy Leary, moved into the office
down the hall from me. Meeting Tim was a major turning point in
my life. We became drinking buddies. I soon discovered that he
had a brilliant mind—brilliant in a way that was different, more
open to looking at the world in new ways.
One semester Timothy returned from the mountains of Mexico,
where he had taken psychedelic mushrooms called teonanácatl, or
“flesh of the gods.” He said he had learned more from that
experience than from all his training in psychology. I was
intrigued. In March 1961, I took psilocybin, a synthetic version
of the magic mushrooms, and everything changed for me. I felt
that psilocybin introduced me to my soul, which was independent
of body and social identity. That experience expanded my
consciousness and changed my view of reality.
Our explorations in psychedelics and subsequent dismissal from
Harvard created a stir on local and national news and brought us a
lot of notoriety. By that point there was a part of me that really
didn’t care about degrees and peer reviews, because the worlds I
was exploring were far more interesting than academia.
Psychedelics allowed me to cut through my traditional upbringing
and tap into realms of mind and spirit that would not have been
available by other means. When I got high, I felt like this was who
I knew myself to be—a deep being, at peace, in love, and free.
I continued using psychedelics for five or six years, trying to
stay in that place of enlightenment, that place of being love. I
would get high and come down, get high and come down, touching
that state of being love but unable to stay there. I wanted to be free,
not high. Ultimately I realized this method wasn’t working for me,
and I began to sink into a deep despair.
In retrospect, while psilocybin, as well as LSD, was critical to
my own awakening, psychedelics are not necessary to the process
of coming into your Self. They can show you a possibility, but
once you’ve seen the possibility, to keep revisiting it again and
again isn’t necessarily transformative. As Alan Watts used to say,
“Once you’ve gotten the message, hang up the phone.” Finally, you
have to live in the world and keep transforming within.
Aldous Huxley had given us a copy of The Tibetan Book of the
Dead, and I realized that the East already had maps of these inner
states that we were exploring intuitively and without reference
points. So in 1966, I went to India in search of someone who knew
about these spiritual planes of consciousness. For the first three
months, I traveled with a friend who had a Land Rover shipped to
Tehran and invited me to join him. We traveled through
Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, and Nepal amidst a haze of hashish.
But it was just another trip—more of the same, getting high and
coming down—more of my own reality, leading to more despair.
Then one day in Kathmandu, Nepal, at a hippie restaurant called
the Blue Tibetan, a strikingly tall Westerner with long blonde hair
and a beard walked in. He was wearing Indian clothes, and he came
over to our table and joined us. It turned out that Bhagavān Was, a
twenty-three-year-old surfer from Laguna Beach, had been living
in India for several years. After a short time with him, I knew he
knew about India. I decided to travel with him to see what I could
learn.
As we were traveling through Nepal and India, I would attempt
to tell my usual charming stories or ask questions about where we
were going. Bhagavān Was would say, “Don’t think about the past;
just be here now,” or “Don’t think about the future; just be here
now.” Although he was compassionate, he didn’t involve himself
in dealing with my emotions. There was nothing much to discuss.
After several months of blisters on my feet, bouts of dysentery, and
lessons in hath yoga, Bhagavān Was said he had to go see his guru
in the Himalaya foothills about his visa. He wanted to drive there
in the Land Rover, which had been left in the care of an Indian
sculptor with instructions to give it to me if I wanted it. So I went
with Bhagavān Was.
On our way up to the hills, we stopped overnight, and I went
outside to go to the restroom. Under the star-filled Indian sky, I
thought about my mother, who had died the previous year of cancer
of the spleen. As I was thinking about her, I experienced a
powerful feeling of her presence. I didn’t tell anyone about it. The
Freudian psychologist in me thought, “There you go, thinking
about your mother while you’re on the restroom.”
THE GURU, REMOVER OF DARKNESS
As we were driving up into the hills, I could tell something was
going on with Bhagavān Was. Tears were streaming down his face,
and he was singing holy songs at the top of his lungs. I sat in the
corner of the seat, sulking. I thought of myself as a Buddhist, and I
didn’t want to see a Hindu guru.
We arrived at a small temple by the side of the road, and
Bhagavān Was asked someone where the guru was. They said
Maharajah was up on the hill. Bhagavān Was went running up the
hill, leaving me sitting there. Everybody was looking at me
expectantly. I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t want to be there. Furthermore, I
didn’t want to see any guru. But finally, compelled by the social
situation, not by my own choice, I went after him. I was stumbling
uphill behind this giant who was running in big leaps and crying.
As we climbed the hill, we came around to a beautiful little
field out of sight of the road and overlooking a valley. In the
middle of the field was a little old man under a tree, sitting on a
wooden bed with a blanket around him. Ten or fifteen Indians
wearing white were sitting around him on the grass. With the
clouds in the background, it was a beautiful tableau. I was too
uptight to appreciate it. I thought it was some kind of cult.
Bhagavān Was ran up and prostrated himself in Dana Graham,
lying face down on the ground with his hands touching this old
man’s toes. Bhagavān Was was still crying, and the man was
patting his head. I didn’t know what to do. I thought this was
lunacy. I was standing off to the side saying to myself, “Well, I’ve
come here, but I’m not going to touch anybody’s feet.” I didn’t
know what this was all about. I was totally paranoid.
The old man was patting Bhagavān Was’s head, and then he
looked up at me. He pulled Bhagavān Was’s head up and said to
him in Hindi, “Have you got a picture of me?” Through his tears,
Bhagavān Was said yes. Maharajah said, “Give it to him.”
I thought, “Gee, that’s really nice, this little old man is going to
give me a picture of himself. Wow.” It was the first ego boost I had
gotten all day, and I really needed it.
Maharajah looked at me and said something that was translated
as, “You came in a big car?” He was smiling.
That was the one topic I didn’t want to talk about. We had
borrowed the Land Rover from my friend. I felt responsible for it.
Still smiling, Maharajah said, “Will you give it to me?”
I started to say it wasn’t my car, but Bhagavān Was jumped up
and said, “Maharajah, if you want it, it’s yours.”
I sputtered, “You can’t give him that car! That’s not our car to
give away.”
Maharajah looked up at me and said, “Do you make much
money in America?”
I figured he thought all Americans were rich. I said, “Yeah, I
made a lot of money in America, at one time.”
“How much did you make?”
“Well, one year I made $25,000.”
They all calculated that in rupees, and it was a sizable amount
of money. Maharajah said, “Will you buy a car like that for me?”
At that moment, I thought that I had never been hustled so fast
in my life. I grew up around Jewish charities. We were good at
shaking the tree, but never this good. I mean, I hadn’t really even
met this guy, and already he’d asked me for a $7,000 car. I said,
“Well, maybe.”
This whole time he was smiling at me. My head was going
around in circles. Everyone else was laughing because they knew
he was putting me on, but I didn’t know that.
He said we should go and take Prasad, “food.” We were taken
down to the little temple and treated royally and given beautiful
food and a place to rest. This was way up in the mountains—no
telephones, no lights, nothing.
After a while, we were brought back to Maharajah. He said to
me, “Come, sit.” He looked at me, and he said, “You were out under
the stars last night.” “Yeah.”
He said, “You were thinking about your mother.”
“Mm … hmm. Yeah.”
“She died last year?”
“Yeah.”
“She got very big in the stomach before she died.”
“That’s right.”
“Spleen. She died of spleen.” He said “spleen” in English. When he
said
“spleen,” he looked directly at me.
At that moment, two things happened simultaneously.
First, my rational mind, like a computer out of control, tried
desperately to figure out how he could have known that. I went
through every super-CIA paranoid scenario possible, like, “They
brought me here, and this is part of the mind-screw thing. Or he’s
got this dossier on me. Wow, they’re pretty good! But how could
he know that? I didn’t tell anyone, not even Bhagavān Was …,” and
so on. But no matter how grandiose I got, my mind just couldn’t
handle this one. It wasn’t in the instruction manual. It was beyond
even my paranoid fantasies, and some of them were pretty
imaginative.
Until then, I had an intellectual position on anything psychic or
super-natural that happened. If I heard about it secondhand, I
would say, as any good Harvard scientist would, “Well, that is
interesting. We certainly must keep an open mind about these
things. There’s some interesting research being done in this field.
We’ll look into it.”
Or if I were high on LSD, I as the observer would say, “Well,
how do I know I’m not just creating this whole thing out of whole
cloth anyway?” But I wasn’t under any chemical influence, and
this old man had just said “spleen.” In English. How did he know
that?
My mind went faster and faster, trying to figure out how
Maharajah could know this. Finally, like a cartoon computer with
an insoluble problem, the bell rang, and the red light went on and
the machine stopped. My rational mind gave up. It just went pouf!
Second, at that same moment, there was a violent wrenching, a
very painful pull in my chest, and I started to cry. Later I realized
it was my fourth chakra, the heart center, opening. I looked up at
Maharajah, and he was looking back at me with total love. I
realized he knew everything about me, even the things I was most
ashamed of, and yet he wasn’t judging me. He was just loving me
with pure unconditional love.
I cried, and I cried, and I cried and I cried. I wasn’t sad and I
wasn’t happy. The closest I can say is that I was crying because I
was home. I had carried my big load up the hill, and now it was all
done. The journey was over, and I had finished my search.
All that paranoia washed out of me, and everything else too. I
was left with just a feeling of fantastic love and peace. I was in the
living presence of Maharajah’s unconditional love. I had never
been loved so completely. From that moment on, all I wanted was
to touch Maharajah’s feet.
Later Maharajah gave me a spiritual name, Ram Days, which
means “servant of God” (“RAM” is one of the Hindu incarnations
of God, “Days” means servant). He also sent Hard Days Baba to me
as a teacher to instruct me in yoga and renunciation for the next
five months.
NOWHERE TO GO
During the months I was in yogi training at Maharajah’s little
temple in the hills, I got really high. It felt like light was pouring
out of my head.
At one point I had to go to Delhi to get my visa renewed. I went
as a yogi. I had long hair and a long beard and male (prayer beads),
and I was wearing white. As I was walking barefoot through
Conn aught Circus, in the center of New Delhi, I felt the Shakti, the
spiritual energy, everywhere. I loved it. My newly spiritual ego
was along for the ride too.
I put in my visa application and collected the mail from
American Express. Then I went to a pure vegetarian restaurant for
lunch. I was hungry, but I was maintaining my yogic purity. In
India, they treat holy people with great respect, but if you’re a
white holy man from the West, that’s really very unusual. So I was
doubly holy, and they were very respectful. They watched me eat. I
had the vegetarian special, and I ate very consciously and
logically.
At the end they served a dessert that had two little English
biscuits in it. I knew those weren’t yogi food. You know, when
you’re pure, you can smell which food is pure and which is impure.
But there is always a very oral Jewish boy in me too, and he
wanted those cookies. So while I looked holy, I carefully edged the
dish over and pushed the cookies into my bag. I looked as if I was
thinking of something holy. I ate the biscuits in the alley outside
the restaurant.
Then I went back up to the mountains, an eight-hour bus ride,
and as I entered the temple, I went to touch Maharajah’s feet. I
looked up at him, and he said, “How did you like the biscuits?”
SIMPLE TRUTH
I kept hoping to get esoteric teachings from Maharajah, but when I
asked, “How can I become enlightened?” he said things like, “Love
everybody, serve everybody, and remember God,” or “Feed
people.” When I asked, “How can I know God?” Maharajah said,
“The best form to worship God is in all forms. God is in
everything.” These simple teachings, to love, serve, and remember,
became the guideposts for my life.
Maharajah read people’s thoughts, but beyond that, he knew
their hearts. That blew my mind. In my own case, he opened my
heart because I saw that he knew everything there was to know
about me, even my darkest and most shameful faults, and he still
loved me unconditionally. From that moment, all I wanted was to
share that love.
Although he knew I would have liked to stay with him forever,
in early spring of 1967, Maharajah told me it was time for me to
return to America. He said not to tell anyone about him. I didn’t
feel ready, and I told him I didn’t feel pure enough. He had me turn
around and around, and he looked me up and down intently.
Looking into my eyes, he said, “I don’t see any impurities.”
Before I left India, I was told that Maharajah had given his
achieved, his blessing, for my book. I replied, “What’s an
achieved? And what book?” I didn’t start out planning to write the
book that became Be Here Now. Be Here Now is Maharajah’s book.
As I sat in the Delhi airport, waiting to leave India, a group of
American soldiers kept staring at me. I had long hair, a full beard,
and was wearing a long white Indian robe that looked like a dress.
One of the soldiers approached me and said, “What are you, some
kind of yogurt?” When I got off the plane in Boston, my father,
George, picked me up at the airport. He took one look at me and
said, “Quick, get in the car before someone sees you.” I thought,
“This is going to be an interesting trip.”
Forty years and one near-fatal stroke later, it is still quite a
journey. Being here now is even more relevant for me. Being at the moment, at ease with whatever comes one’s way, becomes
contentment. This practice allows me to be present to love and
serve others and to express unconditional love in the world. When
you are fully at the moment, this moment is all there is. It feels
like time slows down. When your mind is quiet, you enter into the
flow of love, and you just flow from one moment to the next as
naturally as breathing.
Whatever arises, I embrace it with love at the moment. This is
my practice of polishing the mirror to reflect Maharajah’s love. At this moment there is just awareness and love. If someone asks me
how to get into their heart, I give them this practice: I Am Loving
Awareness.
In India when people meet and part they say, “Namaste,” which
means:
I honor the place in you
Where the entire universe resides.
I honor the place in you
Of love, of light, of truth, of peace.
I honor the place in you
Where if you are in that place in you, and
I am in that place in me,
There is only one of us.
Namaste.
RAM DAYS
MAUI
AUGUST 2013
Chapter 1
Polishing the Mirror
MIND FIELDS
The essence of yoga is union or becoming one with the universe.
The conceptual heart of yoga, Patanjali’s yoga surreys, begins with
“Yoga pitta gritty Nicola,” which means “unified consciousness
comes with cessation of thoughts.” Quieting the mind allows the
natural depth of the spirit to manifest.
Meditation, the practice of quieting and concentrating and
purifying the mind, aligning it with the spirit, is a foundation of
yoga. Although it can start from the thinking mind, and you can get
into it through thought, meditation goes beyond the thinking mind.
Meditation stems from the truth that who you really are is more
than who you think you are.
The more you desire to know who you truly are and why you are
here on earth, the more you are drawn to that truth. As you are
pulled inward, you begin to leave behind the kinds of clinging and
attachment that keep distorting and narrowing your vision.
Your mind can take you into the spirit, but it can also keep you
deeply attached to your ego, to who you think you are. Western
culture glorifies the mind, but there are other ways of knowing, and
the thinking mind is only part of our being. The reality of oneness
is greater than what is available to you through your senses and
your thoughts.
Attachment to the melodrama of your ego is what keeps you
from being here now. This model of who you think you are and
how you think the world is constantly brings you down into
separateness. These are habits of mind. Because of the nature of
these attachments, you can see only what you can see, which from
the ego’s standpoint is a world of subject and objects, me and the
material world.
A more skillful use of the intellect is contemplation. It is also a
form of Nana (pronounced “Ryan”) yoga, the path of knowledge
and wisdom. In this yoga of the mind, you use the mind to reflect
on itself. For example, each morning, take out a holy book and
work with a thought. Don’t read many pages; just take one thought
and sit with it for ten or fifteen minutes. Think about it throughout
your day.
If we reflect on the qualities of Christ’s love, or of equanimity,
kindness, or compassion, we begin to take on those qualities. Sri
Ramakrishna said, “If you meditate on your ideal, you will acquire
its nature. If you think of God day and night, you will acquire the
nature of God.”
YOU CAN’T KNOW IT; YOU CAN ONLY BE IT
If you’re reading this, you already recognize you’re on a spiritual
journey. You also may understand that, from within the illusion of
our separateness, what we perceive is relative reality, what in India
is referred to as Maya, the projected illusion of subject and objects.
All around you there are various levels of relative reality. In
exploring the mind, it is helpful to examine those relative realities.
Many people are so totally involved in their lives that the
spiritual element is irrelevant to them. They have no sense that
behind their apparent reality there is another equally true reality, a
spiritual dimension.
When you begin to awaken to your predicament—that you are
trapped in illusion—you begin to see through the dreamlike quality
of the veils of illusion. Everything you thought was real you now
see as Maya (illusion).
Motivations and desires affect our perceptions. We don’t
necessarily see things as they are. We see them as we are. Our
desire system creates our perceptual universe. In that sense, you
can say our reality is a projection of how we identify ourselves.
Hard Days, my yoga teacher at the ashram in India, once wrote on
his chalkboard, “If a pickpocket meets a saint, all he sees are his
pockets.” In The Lazy Man’s Guide to Enlightenment, Thaddeus
Goals says, “You never have to change what you see, only the way
you see it.”
Gurdjieff, a great spiritual teacher who taught in Europe and
America in the early decades of the twentieth century, noted that if
you think you’re free, and you don’t know you are in prison, you
can’t escape. Gurdjieff saw us as being in a prison of our own
habits of mind. Unless we understand how we are conditioned by
our desires, we remain stuck in the reality they create, like a
television program with an ad that keeps repeating over and over,
implanting a subliminal message while we watch the show.
BEYOND THOUGHT
In the West we get rewarded for rational knowledge and learning.
But only when you see that the assumptions you’ve been working
under are not valid, when you despair of getting there through your
rational mind, does the possibility of truly changing your mind
arise. Albert Einstein said, “A new type of thinking is essential if
mankind is to survive and move toward higher levels.” He also
said, “The mind can proceed only so far upon what it knows and
can prove. There comes a point where the mind takes a leap—call
it intuition or what you will—and comes out upon a higher plane of
knowledge, but can never prove how it got there. All great
discoveries have involved such a leap."
In the Vedic lore of India, the ancient sages say there are three
ways to acquire spiritual knowledge:
First and most direct is through your own experience.
Second, you hear about it from somebody you know who knows,
and they tell you.
Third is to study or learn from books like this
with your logical mind.
What about other ways of knowing or experiencing life, ways that
resonate with an inner validity and that feel intuitively right?
Einstein said, “I didn’t arrive at my understanding of the
fundamental laws of the universe through my rational mind.” He
got there through intuition. Intuition is something we really don’t
understand, though we use it all the time. We say someone knew
something intuitively. They have entered into a subjective rather
than objective way of knowing. In fact, there are ways of knowing
other than through the senses and through the thinking mind.
In 1906, William James wrote in The Varieties of Religious
Experience:
Our normal waking consciousness … is but one special type
of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the
filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of
consciousness entirely different. We may go through life
without suspecting their existence; but apply the requisite
stimulus, and at a touch they are there in all their
completeness, definite types of mentality which probably
somewhere have their field of application…. No account of
the universe in its totality can be final which leaves these
other forms of consciousness quite disregarded. How to
regard them is the question…. They may determine attitudes
though they cannot furnish formulas, and open a region
though they fail to give a map. At any rate, they forbid a
premature closing of our accounts with reality.
People first awaken to a spiritual dimension in their lives in an
incredible variety of ways. Some people seem to open up to it
through traumatic experiences, as people describe when they’ve
come near death or at another moment when they touch something
much deeper than the usual way they thought about things. Other
people awaken through meditation or through religious
experiences. Others arrive at it through sex or through drugs.
I remember lecturing in a hall once, back in the early ’70s. Most
of my audience at that time was young, and they tended to wear
white and smile a lot and wear flowers. I wore my male and had a
long beard. In the front row there was a woman of about seventy,
who had on a hat with little fake cherries and strawberries and
things like that on it. She was wearing black oxfords and a print
dress, and she had a black patent leather bag. I looked at her, and I
couldn’t figure out what she was doing in the audience. She looked
so dissimilar to all the rest.
These talks were like a gathering of an explorers club, where we
would come together and just share our experiences. I started to
describe some of my experiences, some of which were pretty far
out. I looked at her, and she was nodding with understanding. Furthermore, I
couldn’t believe that she could understand what I was talking
about. I was describing experiences that I had using psychedelic
chemicals, experiences that involved other planes of
consciousness. I’d look over at her, and there she was, nodding
away. I began to think maybe she had a problem with her neck, and
maybe it had nothing whatsoever to do with what I was saying. I
kept watching and getting more and more fascinated and getting
more and more outrageous, and she kept nodding and nodding.
At the end of the lecture, I just kind of smiled at her so
intensely that she just had to come up and speak to me. She came
up and said, “Thank you so much. That makes perfect sense. That’s
just the way I understand the universe to be.”
And I said, “How do you know? I mean, what have you done in
your life that brought you into those kinds of experiences?”
She leaned forward very conspiratorially, and she said, “I
crochet.”
And at that moment, I realized that people arrive at spiritual
understanding through a much wider spectrum of experience than I
ever anticipated.
Part of the process of awakening is recognizing that the realities
we thought were absolute are only relative. All you have to do is
shift from one reality to another once, and your attachment to what
you thought was real starts to collapse. Once the seed of awakening
sprouts in you, there’s no choice—there’s no turning back.
Actually, we all know that reality is relative; we have known it
since childhood: “Row, row, row your boat, gently down the
stream. Merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily, life is but a dream.”
Life is a dream.
LOSE YOUR MIND TO GAIN YOUR SOUL
One reason to practice purification is to cool out, so we’re not
creating so much heavy karma for ourselves. We are constantly
preoccupied with the creations of our minds. Einstein again: “The
true value of a human being can be found in the degree to which he
has attained liberation from the self.” What we strive to be
liberated from are our habitual thought patterns about ourselves
and the pull of our sensory experiences. Lightening up in these
areas allows us to refocus on centering and calming the mind with
meditation, mantra, or the practices of Shakti yoga. As these
practices deepen, the higher wisdom comes.
Taming the mind is fraught with paradoxes. You have to give it
all up to have it all. Turn off your mind. There is a place in you
beyond thought that already knows—trust in that. Jesus tells us
that unless we become like little children, we cannot enter the
kingdom of heaven. That child mind, sometimes called beginner’s
mind in Zen, is the innocence of pure being, of unconditional love.
If we are to live in that state of pure being, something within us
must die. It’s like when a caterpillar transforms into a butterfly.
The caterpillar does not become a flying caterpillar; it morphs into
a butterfly.
This is the pathless path. Where the journey leads is to the
deepest truth in you. It is really just returning to where you were
initially before you got lost. Shedding the layers of the mind is like
taking layers off of an onion. You peel them all away until you
come to your essence. The spiritual journey is not about acquiring
something outside yourself. Rather, you are penetrating the layers
and veils to return to the deepest truth of your own being.
What you seek is already within you. This reality is subjective,
not the outer objective reality. You may experience it as focused on
the center of your chest. It can be called the soul, or in Hinduism
the Atman, or in Buddhism the pure Buddha-Mind. Jesus Christ
said, “The kingdom of God is within you.” This is the space of full
awareness that is in harmony with the universe; this is wisdom
itself. The full spirit of God is inside each of us. When you want to
approach God, go inward.
ENLIGHTENING UP Offering or cleaning up the ego stuff that distracts you from the
spirit is called purification. Purification is an act of letting go that
is done out of discriminative awareness—that is, you understand
that you are a soul passing through a life in which the entire drama
is a script for your awakening and that you are more than just the
drama. You are a spiritual being having a human experience. Your
life experience is a vehicle for coming to God, for becoming
conscious, for becoming liberated. Ultimately that’s what you are
doing here. This awareness helps you discriminate between
thoughts, feelings, and actions that bring you closer to God, to your
own freedom, and those that take you away from it.
Instead of filling your mind with the daily news, fill it with
stuff that helps you become more conscious, that liberates you. As
you become more aware of what gets you to God and what doesn’t,
you will naturally let go of what doesn’t. That’s purification. You
do it to get to God, not for the sake of being pure.
So how do you become conscious of all these unconscious
influences? Go within to your spiritual heart, your Friday, and
watch the drama that is your entire life. When you quiet your mind
enough to transcend your ego, you can begin to hear how it all is.
Then you watch with unbearable compassion for yourself and all
beings. Watching involves what you may call the witness
consciousness, which comes from your soul plane. It is another
way of polishing the mirror, to connect your thinking mind with
your spiritual heart.
You observe your behavior and thoughts, enhancing your ability
to live fully at the moment, to be here now. Then, when you are
with a candle flame, you are the candle flame and the watcher.
When there is a task to do, you are the task and the observer of the
task. It’s not that you do it—it’s how you do it, where you are
coming from as you act.
WATCHING THE WATCHER
The witness doesn’t evaluate; it doesn’t judge your actions. It
merely makes note of them. It’s a subtle thing, the watcher
watching him- or herself watching. It’s actually two planes of
consciousness simultaneously, the witness and the ego. The
witness is connected to the soul plane.
At first, you may be distracted and remember to witness only
now and then. Later you’ll notice that although you still fall asleep
and lose the witness, you start to remember to witness again
sooner. Just notice. You don’t have to change anything. Eventually
things will change naturally. After some practice, it gets more
subtle, and throughout the day you remain centered in the witness,
watching life’s drama unfold. The witness is always here and now.
It resides in each instant of living.
You ask yourself, “How do I use my every moment to get
here?” The attitude is not heavy or tight, like “I’ve got to be
careful; I might make a mistake.” Relax, be light, dance through it
all, trusting, quieting, flowing. You're witnessing lives in the flow of
your love and the quietness of your mind. Women in Indian
villages talk and gossip as they walk back from the well, but they
never forget the jugs of water on their heads. The jug of water is
what your journey is all about. So do what you do in your life, but
don’t forget the jug of water. Don’t forget what it’s all about.
The illusion keeps pulling you back into forgetting. Lost in your
melodrama, you keep forgetting into it. Sometimes you spill the
water. You will keep forgetting and remembering and forgetting
and remembering. And sometimes, you remember. Keep
your eye on the mark.
BREATHING IN, BREATHING OUT
Eventually the balance shifts. You allow your life to become
simpler and more harmonious. Less and less you grab at this and
push away that. You listen to hear how it is rather than imposing a
structure. Imposing structures doesn’t set you free. Your romantic
attachment to your own story line and how it comes out fades.
“Who am I becoming?” and “What will I be when I grow up?” are
irrelevant when you are just being. All of these models just fall
away. You start to sit simply, live simply, just be where you are,
just be with whomever you’re with when you’re with them. You
listen for your dharma, the spiritual way of living your life.
Aldous Huxley reminds us, “The body is always in time, the
spirit is always timeless, and the psyche is an amphibious creature
compelled by the laws of man’s being to associate itself to some
extent with its body, but capable, if it so desires, of experiencing
and being identified with its spirit.”
Your whole life becomes a meditative act. It’s not just sitting
on your meditation pillow, your AFU. All life is a big AFU, no
matter whether you’re driving or making love or whatever you’re
doing. It’s all meditation. It is the practice of being here now.
When you meditate, you begin to develop the power of your
mind through concentration, through one-pointedness, by
following the breath or repeating a mantra. You develop the
capacity to put your mind on one thought and keep it there and let
everything else flow by. You don’t stop your mind. Furthermore, you let it flow.
But you bring one thought constantly to the surface. You keep
coming back to one thought. “Breathing in, breathing out,” or
“Rising, falling.” Or you use your mantra, “RAM, RAM, RAM, RAM,
RAM …” Whether you are eating, sleeping, making love, “RAM,
RAM, RAM …” keeps going. You spiritualize your life. You convert
it all by maintaining a frame of reference that has the dual capacity
of centering you and increasing the power of one-pointedness.
Maharajah told me, “Bring your mind to one point and wait for
grace.”
A GUIDED VISUAL MEDITATION
Sit straight, so your head, neck, and chest are in alignment. Start by
focusing on your heart area, in the middle of your chest, where the
Friday, the spiritual heart, is located. With your mouth closed,
breathe in and out of your chest, focusing on your heart as if you
were breathing in and out through your heart. Breathe deeply.
Because of the purity of your seeking, many incredibly high
beings are present, and with them comes the spiritual substance out
of which all form derives. You can imagine that substance as a
golden mist that fills the air. With every breath, don’t just breathe
in air; imagine you are pulling into yourself this golden substance.
Fill with it; let it pour through your entire body.
Breathe in the energy of the universe, the Shakti of the universe.
Breathe in the breath of God. Let it fill your whole body. Each time
you breathe out, breathe out all the things in you that keep you
from knowing your true Self; breathe out all the separateness, all
the feelings of unworthiness, all the self-pity, all the attachment to
your pain, whether it’s physical or psychological. Breathe out
anger and doubt and greed and lust and confusion. Breathe in
God’s breath, and breathe out all the impediments that keep you
from knowing God. Let the breath be the transformation.
Now let the golden mist that has poured into your being focus in
the middle of your chest; let it take form as a tiny being, the size of
a thumb, sitting on a lotus flower right in the middle of your chest.
Notice its equanimity, the radiance that comes from within. Use
your imagination. As you look upon this being, see that it is
radiating light. See the light pouring out. As you meditate upon it,
experience the deep peace that is emanating from this being. Feel,
as you look upon this being, that it is a being of great wisdom. It’s
sitting quietly, silently, perfectly poised in your heart. Feel its
compassion and its love. Let yourself be filled with its love.
Now, slowly let that tiny being grown in size until it fills your
body, so its head fills the space with your head, its torso, your torso,
its arms, your arms, its legs, your legs. So now in the skin of your
body sits this being—a being of infinite wisdom, a being of the
deepest compassion, a being that is bathed in bliss, a being that is
self-effulgent: a being of perfect tranquility.
Let this being begun to grow in size. Experience yourself
growing until everything in the surrounding room is within your
body. All the sounds, all the sensory experiences are coming
from inside you.
Continue to grow. Feel your vastness, your peace, your
equanimity. Your head extends into the sky. Expand until your
town, your environment, and all those beings within them are
contained within you. Experience the human condition; see the
loneliness, joy, caring, violence, paranoia, a mother’s love for her
child, sickness, fear of death—see it all. It is all within you. See it
with compassion and with caring and, at the same moment, with
equanimity. Feel the light pour through your being.
Let yourself grow still larger. Feel your vastness increase until
you are sitting in the middle of this galaxy, the earth deep within
your belly. All humankind is within you. Feel the turmoil and the
longing. Feel the beauty. Sit in this universe, silent, peaceful,
compassionate, loving. All the creations of human beings’
minds are within you; look upon them with compassion.
Continue to grow until not only this galaxy but every galaxy is
within you, until everything you can conceive of is within you. All
of it is inside you. You are the only One. Feel your aloneness, your
silence, your peace. There are no other beings here; all planes of
consciousness are within you, and all beings are within you.
You are the Ancient One. Everything that ever was, is, or will
be is part of the dance of your being. You are the universe, so you
have infinite wisdom; you feel all the feelings of the universe,
so you have infinite compassion. Let the boundaries of your being
dissolved, and merge yourself into that which is beyond form. Sit
for a moment in the formless, beyond compassion, beyond love,
beyond God. Let it all be in its perfection.
Very gently, very slowly, let the boundaries of your vast being,
the One, reestablish themselves. Vast, silent, all is within you.
Come back from beyond the One and slowly come down in size.
Come down through the universes into this universe, until your
head is once again among the planets and the earth is within you.
Come down again until your head is once again in the heavens and
the cities are within you.
Come down in size until your head is at the top of your room.
Stop here for a moment. From this place, look down into the room
and find the being who you thought you were when you began this
meditation. Look at that being, bringing to bear all of your love
and compassion. See the journey of that being as it is living out
this incarnation; see its fears, its doubts, its connections. See all
the thoughts and objects it clings to that keep it from being free.
See how close it is to knowing who it is. Look within that being
and see the purity of its soul.
Reach down and, with your mind, very gently place your hand
on the head of this being and bestow upon it you're blessing that in
this very life it may fully know itself. Experience simultaneously
that which blesses and that which is being blessed.
Now come back down into the body you thought you were when
you began. You are still flesh surrounding a being of radiance and
wisdom, a being of compassion that comes from attunement with
the truth, with love for all that comes from being that vast One.
That love and peace are pouring out of you to all beings
everywhere, like a beacon for all those who suffer.
Remember those people toward whom you have felt less than
loving. Look to their souls and surround them with light, with the
love and peace of this moment. Let go of the anger and the
judgment.
Send the light of love and peace out to people who are ill, who
are lonely, who are afraid, who have lost their way. Share your
blessings, because only when you give can you continue to receive.
As you journey on this spiritual path, accept the responsibility for
sharing what you receive. That is part of God’s harmony, of
becoming an instrument for the will of God.
Let the radiant, perfect being within you again assume its
diminutive form, the size of a thumb. See it again sitting on a lotus
flower in your spiritual heart, in the middle of your chest, radiant
with light, peaceful, immensely compassionate. This being is love.
This being is wisdom. This is the inner guru. This is the being
within you who always knows. This is the being you meet through
your deeper intuition when you go beyond your mind. This is the
tiny form of the entire universe that exists within you.
At any time, you need only sit and quiet your mind, and you
will hear this being guiding you home. When you finish this
journey, you will have disappeared into this being, surrendered,
merged, and then you will know the truth that Ramona Maharishi, a
great realized being from India, meant when he said that God,
guru, and Self are one.
Chapter 2
Shakti Yoga, the Path of
Devotion
or “union”—union with God. Shakti yoga is
“YOGA” MEANS “YOKE”
the path of devotion, of loving God and imbibing God’s love. The
practitioner of Shakti, the Dhaka, is the lover, and God is the
Beloved. Shakti uses the dualism of relationship, the deep longing
of the heart, for the lover to merge with the Beloved, to become
one in love. Shakti is the path of the spiritual heart, using our
human emotions to forge the connection between the human and
the divine. The practices of Shakti yoga awaken this flow of love.
We may sing to the Beloved, we may pray, we may sit with a
picture of a holy being, or we may just dwell in the sweetness of
remembering God. Once you have set out on the river of love, all
you have to do is let it carry you to the ocean. When Maharajah
was asked how to meditate, he said, “Meditate the way Christ
meditated…. He lost himself in love.”
Devotion complements the quieting of the mind in meditation
by opening the heart. This out flowing of the heart toward the
object of our devotion further polishes the mirror reflecting the
spirit. This flow of loving energy amplifies other methods too, as
we’ll explore later.
Opening my heart made it easier for my mind to change. That’s
really what devotion is about—it’s a way of making it very easy to
turn your mind in a certain direction because the love is so
seductive, because it brings so much joy. Ramakrishna said,
“Shakti, love of God, is the essence of all spiritual discipline.”
The yoga of devotion starts from right here where we are, as
embodied souls separate from God. When we are fully present at this moment, with a quiet mind and an open heart, we experience
the flow of love from our spiritual heart. Shakti yoga opens us to
this flow of divinely inspired love.
You could say Shakti is the love play, the Lila, between God and
the soul. Shakti yoga uses the dualistic relationship of lover and
Beloved to take us into the essence of love, to become love. Love
has a built-in power to carry us beyond the limitations of our
separate being, our ego, to the Atman, our higher being. Our
personal emotional love gets absorbed into the all-encompassing
unconditional love of the One. As Meter Baba said, “Being is
dying by loving.”
Of all the different yoga, all the many ways to the One, all the
various routes up the mountain, Shakti is known as the easy path.
With Shakti, you don’t really have to do anything; you just relax
and let go and open your heart.
It doesn’t matter whether you call it love of God or of the guru
or of the truth of who you are. How you think of it is really
irrelevant. The emotional tidal wave of a love affair with the
Divine is so intense that it carries you beyond your thinking mind.
This devotion begins to permeate whatever you’re doing in your
life, bringing it into the divine love play. In Sanskrit that soul joy
is called sat cit Amanda, “truth-consciousness-bliss.” Or you could
say, “Consciousness of Truth is bliss.”
Devotion to God underlies most spiritual traditions, especially
those oriented more to the emotional and ecstatic than to the
intellectual. Love is more than an idea. We can’t just sit down and
intellectually figure out what Shakti or devotion is about. It has to
do with the heart, and heart trips are experienced in a realm that’s
not necessarily conceptual. The harder you try to think your way
through to devotion, the harder it will be. Hafiz the poet said, “O
thou who are trying to learn the marvel of love from the copybook
of reason, I’m very much afraid that you will never really see the
point.”
We can think and talk about Shakti yoga, but we experience it
through Kiran, or chanting; mystical poetry; the remembrance of
saints; mantras for opening the heart; or just by being together in
love, in true sat sang. The openness of love is timeless. When you
are with another being in love, you are sharing your being, your
presence. You are just here, together in love.
The minute I heard my first love story
I started looking for you, not knowing how blind that was.
Lovers don’t finally meet somewhere.
They are in each other all along.
RUM
Many of us are afraid to let go of our judging minds to fall into
love, to be absorbed into the liquid flow of the universe. In the case
of divine love, faith makes it easier to let go. In romantic
relationships it’s a tricky balance because relationships bring up
our personal fears and vulnerabilities. Understanding the
difference between emotional or romantic love and divine love is
helpful in allaying those fears. Loving God is totally safe because
the object of love is ultimately your true Self.
In Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism, the Tibetan teacher
Program Trunk Roche speaks of what is necessary for a
spiritual transmission between two people—a relationship of
openness and trust and warmth. Another expression of that
relationship is from the I Ching: “The Master said … when two
people are at one in their inmost hearts, they shatter even the
strength of iron or of bronze. And when two people understand
each other in their inmost hearts, their words are sweet and strong,
like the fragrance of orchids.”
HOW DO I LOVE THEE?
Gurdjieff talks about three levels of love. There’s physiological,
sexual, biochemical love—“let’s make love.” Then there is
romantic love, which is personality love, loving an object.
Romantic love has in it jealousy and possessiveness and all the
interpersonal psychodynamics. When you say, “I fell in love with
so-and-so,” what you are really saying is, “So-and-so turns me on
to the place in me where I am the ocean of love.”
The third kind of love is conscious love, spiritual love. It is
important to understand that there is a difference between romantic
love and spiritual love. To change romantic love into an expanding,
conscious love, we have to take it up another level. Conscious or
spiritual love is unconditional; it’s soul love. To enter into the
space of conscious love you become love—not loving someone or
something, but just being love.
This is not to say these levels of love are really separate or that
one kind can’t be contained in another, such as sexual love
becoming subsumed in love of the Divine (a practice of Tantra, a
yoga that uses external energy for internal transformation). Shakti
focuses on spiritual love, the soul’s love for God.
If we can see even for a moment that loving another person is
loving the manifestation of the spirit in them, just loving love, then
they become yet another form of the Beloved, of God. This is
love’s truth: that love is in all of us, that we are one in love.
RAM hi deal REMA Picard
Jean Leo Jo JA Nazi Hara
Love loves only love
He who knows this can know
FROM THE RAMAYANA OF TULSA DAS
LOVE IS A STATE OF BEING
When I live in the place where I am love, I see love wherever I
look. It’s very far out. Imagine seeing love in everyone and
everything. Love doesn’t demand that you do anything about it.
We’re all right here in love. To the extent another being is open,
when I meet them, there’s a harmonic resonance with the place
where they also exist as love—not that they are loving, but where
they are love. Suddenly here we are in the ocean of love, which is
what Christ’s love is about. This love isn’t possessive. We can’t
collect it. We can only become it.
As you grow in devotion and focus more and more on the
Beloved, you tune in to a deeper place within yourself. The
emotional, romantic qualities give way to a new kind of love where
finally you see everyone and everything as the Beloved.
It is only when you begin to understand that love is a state of
being that you can really be in love. If you and I are truly in love, if
we both dwell in the place in ourselves that is love, we are together
in love. Being in love is sharing a common state together.
Anandamide Ma, the Indian saint whose name means “bliss-permeated mother,” said to her devotees, “You all love this body
so much that you often come to see me, unmindful of the long
distance that many of you have to travel. Yet, it is true that this
body has no relationship with any of you except the kinship of the
Atman [the universal soul] which this body enjoys equally not only
with each of you but even with all trees, creepers, and foliage
around, as well as with rocks, mountains and everything else.”
GURU KR IPA (THE GURU’S GRACE)
When Dada Mukherjee, an old devotee of Maharajah, visited the
Need Karol Baba Ashram in Tao's, New Mexico, he was surprised
to find sincere devotees who had never met Maharajah in the body.
Dada said, “The real miracle is these devotees who never met
Maharajah and have the same devotion.” They knew Maharajah
primarily through the stories in Be Here Now and Miracle of Love.
Many Westerners have realized that if you invite Maharajah into
your heart, he will be with you.
That quality of loving, trusting openness allows you to receive
the transmission from another being. It was Maharajah’s love and
my opening to him that allowed his blessings to come through. The
way Shakti works is you just love until you and the Beloved
become one. As each person opens and loves, the grace comes
through—it just pours into you.
Let me always feel you present,
in every atom of my life.
Let me keep surrendering my self
until I am utterly transparent.
Let my words be rooted in honesty
and my thoughts be lost in your light,
Unnameable God, my essence,
my origin, my life-blood, my home.
FROM PSALM 19, TRANSLATED BY STEPHEN MITCHELL
For me, the form of the Beloved is my guru, Maharajah Need
Karol Baba. Because the guru is so much a part of my path, I am
often asked if it is necessary to have one. It depends on how you
understand what a guru is. As you go deeper, you begin to
understand (as the meditation at the end of the last chapter shows)
that God, guru, and Self are indeed one.
So the answer comes on different levels. On one hand, it’s not
necessary to have an external guru, because the true guru is an
internal relationship. In the higher sense of Self, you are the guru.
On the other hand, as long as you identify yourself as a separate
entity, it can be helpful to have a personal guru to keep you headed
in the right direction. It depends on what you need.
In Shakti yoga the form of your Beloved can be whatever you
love deeply. You can find it in God, in a guru, in a teacher, in a
flower, or a pet. The Beloved is everywhere. You can find the
Beloved in anyone or anything you love deeply enough that opens
your heart and takes you through. Just allow that love to open you
and dissolve the boundaries of your separateness, melding into one.
Listen to the messages that come through as you sit quietly, and
you will find plenty of guidance. The quieter your mind gets, the
more you are able to hear these inner messages and allow them to
guide you.
How will you know your guru? The guru will know you. You
don’t have to look for the guru. The guru appears when you are
ready. You’ll know. There won’t be any doubt. The guru is a mirror
that reflects your higher Self, allows you to see that place of love
and pure being in yourself. The guru may be Christ or any of a
number of beings, and not necessarily on the physical plane.
Your guru will guide you, to the extent that you ask purely,
through one teaching after another. Some teachings may take the
form of other teachers or situations or experiences. Other teachings
may come from inner experiences as you quiet inside and deepen
your practice. As you begin to trust in that relationship, you will
become more and more attuned to that presence and awareness.
Ask your guru to guide you, and you will begin to see how each life
situation is a teaching from your guru to bring you home.
In India, it is understood that you do not seek the guru. Rather, it
is the guru who finds you.
A guru is different from a teacher. A teacher points the way; the
guru is the way. The guru beckons from beyond. He or she is
somebody who’s all finished. A teacher or teaching, on the other
hand, is somebody (or something) standing next to you and
pointing up the road.
Most people we call gurus are really teachers whose goose is
not fully cooked. The likelihood of finding a being who is
completely done is fairly slim. Most teachers are still working out
their own karma; they have their own stuff still to resolve. A
teacher can be someone through whom a teaching comes, though
they themselves may not be the full truth.
From your point of view, if you’re seeking truth with a pure
heart, you separate the purity of a teacher’s message from the stuff
of their karma. That discrimination develops as you listen to the
guru inside, to your Self. Then you take a teacher’s truth, and you
work with it and use it to take you further on your path. The rest is
their karma.
Even your enemies can be teachers who wake you up to a place
that you’re not, that you need to bring into your awareness. They
help you get free of that place and get on with it. If you see
everything in the universe as a way to work on your own
consciousness—even if it’s showing you where you’re unconscious
or where you’re asleep—then everyone and everything in the
universe becomes your teacher and a means of awakening.
My own teachers have come in all kinds of packages. Some
years ago I was invited by John and Toni Lilly to swim with their
dolphins, Joe and Rosie. Everybody wanted to swim with dolphins,
and I wanted to swim with dolphins too, although I wasn’t quite
sure why. When I got to the holding tank, it was a cold, gray day. I
thought maybe this was really not for me. But other people were
watching, and after all, this was Ram Days swimming with the
dolphins.
I got into the water, and these huge beings zoomed by me very
close up. They were quite intimidating. I was treading water and
feeling out of my natural medium. After a while, one of the
dolphins, Rosie, was sort of hovering just to my left, and I reached
out and touched her. I assumed that when you touch a wild creature
it would be startled or irritated and swim away. But Rosie didn’t
swim away.
I started to stroke Rosie’s back. It was amazingly soft, like silk,
very porous. I stroked some more. The wild creature model of who
I had thought she was had stopped working. In that model, she
wouldn’t have allowed me to stroke her because I was doing it with
considerable pressure at that point. At that moment, my mind let
go, and I started to experience ecstasy just being with Rosie. Then
she dove to the bottom of the pool, but I stayed on the surface.
When I didn’t follow her to the bottom, she came back up to get
me. When I finally let go, Rosie turned herself upright, vertical in
the water, and pressed her stomach against my stomach.
I noticed everyone watching me with my stomach pressed
against this dolphin’s stomach, and I wondered, “Is this legal? Is it
ethical?” I found myself putting my arms around her and kissing
her on the mouth, saying, “Oh, Rosie!” I was going into such states
of ecstasy. I realized that Rosie, as one of my teachers, was taking
me out of my mind into the fullness of the moment that is part of
the mystery of enlightenment.
Teachings are everywhere. Your guru is waiting for you to be
ready for him or her. You don’t have to rush off to India, because
the guru and the teaching are always right where you are, right
here, right now.
DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS
Devotion is a love affair between your soul and God. K. K. SAH,
one of Maharajah’s closest devotees, was with Maharajah since
childhood. Maharajah assigned him to watch over me, and he took
me to live in his home in those early days in India. Here is what he
writes about devotion:
Devotion is easy and natural and has no hard and fast rules
on how one should meditate. By devotion one can realize the
secret of love itself. On this path the aspirant sees the
universe as the very expression of his Beloved.
The only thing it requires is faith—implicit faith. There is
nothing to argue, it is beyond logic. It is like learning to
swim: a person cannot enter the water unless he can swim,
and swimming is impossible without entering the water.
There are various attitudes or feelings with which one
may approach the Beloved. You might feel as though God
were your child, like the feeling of Ashoka (Krishna’s
mother) toward her baby Krishna, or the feeling of Mary for
the infant Jesus. Or you could see God as a friend. Again
there is the attitude of the servant toward his Master, where
you serve the Lord as Hangman serves Lord Rama in the
Ramayana. Then there is the attitude of lover, where you see
your Beloved with the love of husband or wife…. Becoming
the bride of God, like the Hopis sporting with Lord Krishna
or St. Therese the Little Flower married to her Beloved
Jesus. Finally, there is the attitude of peaceful contemplation
of the great saints and sages, the ancient yogis of India.
There are many ways to open yourself, to make yourself
more receptive to this love for God. One way is through
sat sang, the company of Saints, contact with the living spirit
of truth and love in other beings. Delighting in the stories
and incidents of God in His many forms and incarnations—
like the life of Christ, or Rama or Krishna—can also bring
this love. Or by humbly serving at the feet of the Guru, the
devotee can efface the ego in surrender to God. And
constantly singing His name and His praises further centers
the mind and heart on Him. For the devotee, the mere
repetition of the Name of God brings His Presence. Then
with firm faith, one crosses the ocean of desire in the boat of
the Name.
MAHARAJAH
The method of the guru is called guru Krita, which is the particular
form of Shakti yoga that focuses on the guru and on the guru’s
blessing or grace (Krita). Most of the time I’m just hanging out
with my guru, even though he’s no longer in the body. The
thoughts and remembrances of him come up a thousand times a
day. I may be sitting with someone, and they turn into my guru—
over and over again. It’s just hanging out with this incredible being
of love, of consciousness, of presence. It’s a way of opening
myself to those qualities. It’s a process of surrendering to that
place of unconditional love.
The essence of a relationship with a guru or spiritual teacher is
love. The guru awakens incredible love in us, then uses that love to
help us out of the illusion of duality.
The relationship between the guru and the Chega (“devotee”)
was beautifully described by Ramona Maharishi: “It’s like an
elephant waking up upon seeing a lion in a dream. Just as the
appearance of the dream lion is enough to wake the elephant, so
also is the glance of Grace from the Master enough to waken the
devotee from the sleep of ignorance to the Knowledge of the Real.”
In other words, the guru, as a separate entity, exists only within the
illusion of separateness, within the dream. As soon as the method
of the guru has worked, and it awakens you, it automatically self-destructs.
The relationship between a guru and a Chega has nothing to do
with the intellect whatsoever. You may think you’re surrendering,
but there’s really no choice involved in it. There is just deep karma
unfolding so that you are drawn to the guru when the moment is
right.
At first all I wanted to do was be with my guru, look at his
form, and touch his feet. After a while, the love grew different, no
less intense but less to do with the form, until I was very fulfilled
just being at a distance from him. And as time went on, it just kept
growing deeper and deeper, and I didn’t care if I was with his form
at all anymore. As I went deeper still, it wasn’t about a man in
India anymore—it was the essence of Guinness. I began to
experience it in myself instead of in relation to him as an external
being. The whole dynamic of the relationship was changing as I
was deepening, and my heart was opening, and my surrender was
increasing. I’ve said half jokingly that I worshiped his form until I
realized his form was just the doorpost, and I was just worshiping
doorposts. As I looked through that doorway, each surrender led
me further in. It was a method that took me right back into myself
and beyond the form.
The guru constantly reflects that part of us that is beyond
form. That process also illuminates the dust on our own mirror, the
impurities and imperfections of our individuality that keep us from
becoming one, from living fully in that place of pure being and
unconditional love. Sometimes, for a moment, the guru will blow it
away to give us a glimpse.
I remember standing in the front yard of a humble house in a
village in the hills when Maharajah arrived unexpectedly. I was
told to remain outside, so I had the opportunity to watch other
people arriving. They seemed to appear almost out of nowhere,
coming from all directions. Women were running, wiping flour
from their hands on their aprons, carrying their half-dressed
babies. The men had left their shops unattended. People were
pulling flowers from the trees as they came, so they would have
something to offer. They came with a feeling of expectation, with
such joy and a reverence that could not be mistaken.
I watched newcomers arrive, some skeptical with questions. I
saw their hearts gently open and this soft, flowerlike quality
emerge under the tender care of the master gardener. Maharajah
touched each person’s heart in a way special to that individual.
Everyone’s experience with him was different. That’s why you
can’t explain what it was like to be with him. Everyone had their
own heart connection.
How do you describe a being like Maharajah? It’s like trying to
describe the sweetness of a fruit or the fragrance of a rose. When I
was with him, there was nothing other than Maharajah—it was
total, effortless worship. Krishna Was remembers, “We would
come up against our fears and our stuff, and then he’d just kill it
with love. Maharajah would just look at you and giggle, and you
would forget your stuff.” He was like a magnet of love attracting
us all. And that love was his real teaching.
For some devotees, what stands out is the precious intimacy that
comes from experiencing another being within the same space that
your own being occupies, like the whisper of a lover who knows
your innermost heart. When you are in the presence of
unconditional love, you are in the optimum environment for your
heart to open. The moment your heart opens, you are once again
letting in the flow, and that flow is where you experience God.
That is the experience of being with Maharajah. Perhaps your
experience with your Beloved is like that too.
Meter Baba, in Life at Its Best, said, “Devotees should keep
their love for their Guru alive and aglow, by making him their
constant companion in all their thoughts, words and actions, while
carrying on their responsibilities, commitments and all other
apparently necessary things of this world.”
THE FEELING OF DEVOTION
I will set You on my breath
So You will become my life.
RUM
Swami Muktananda, in his guru Krita Sahara, used to meditate
intensely on his guru, Nityananda. He would visualize bringing
him into his own body until he himself became Nityananda. So
intoxicated did he become in his devotion to his guru that there
were times when he didn’t know if he was Muktananda or
Nityananda.
A sense of that feeling of devotion comes from the first-century
Odes of Solomon:
My heart was split, and a flower appeared;
and grace sprang up; and it bore fruit for my God.
You split me, tore my heart open,
filled me with love.
You poured your spirit into me;
I knew you as I know myself.
…
My eyes are radiant with your spirit;
my nostrils fill with your fragrance.
My ears delight in your music,
and my face is covered with your dew.
Blessed are the men and women
who are planted on your earth, in your garden,
who grow as your trees and flowers grow,
who transform their darkness to light.
Their roots plunge into darkness;
their faces turn toward the light.
…
There is infinite space in your garden;
all men, all women are welcome here;
all they need do is enter.
HANGMAN, DEVOTED SERVANT OF RAM
The Indian epic the Ramayana is a saga of God taking physical
form as a warrior prince to guide humanity and strengthen our
faith. It’s a story of grace. The legend is that it was first written
down in Sanskrit over 2,000 years ago by the poet-sage Valid. A
vernacular Hindi version by Tulsa Was is recited and performed in
Hindu homes and temples and at annual festivals. It’s like the
Bible of North India. You can read the Ramayana on many levels,
as an actual historic event or a romantic tale of the battle between
good and evil. You can also hear the characters as symbolic
archetypes of sacred and secular forces, the soul and the ego, the
truth of dharma and the illusion of desire, all of which vie within
each of us. It is a multilevel work of living spirit that stirs our
impulses toward divinity.
One of the main characters in the Ramayana is the monkey god,
Hangman, who is the perfect servant and great devotee of RAM—
God in the human form of a prince. Hangman represents our
simian lower nature in service of the highest Self. Hangman says to
RAM, “When I don’t know who I am, I serve you. When I know
who I am, you and I are one.”
RAM and his wife, Site, and his brother, Lakshman, were
banished to the forest for fourteen years under extraordinary
circumstances. (You will have to read the book if you want all the
details.) Site, the perfect wife, who is also the soul and the earth
mother, the Shakti or power of God, is stolen away, kidnapped by
Havana, a demon king who is the bad guy in the story. Havana is
full of ego and pride. He has ten heads, and every one of them is
full of power. RAM, though he is God on Earth, is distraught
because he’s also a husband. (As a husband he’s bereft, though as
God, he’s not.)
Looking for Site, RAM enlists the help of the bears and the
monkeys, who are rather human characters too. The chief monkey
to help him is Hangman. They search for Site and finally ascertain
that she has been taken by Havana to the island of Sri Lanka (which
used to be called Ceylon) off the southern coast of India.
There is an ocean between India and Sri Lanka, and when the
monkeys and bears all get to the shore, they can’t figure out how to
get across to rescue Site. They’re discussing it among themselves,
and each one has a reason why they can’t jump across. Somebody
has to just jump the ocean; there’s no time for anything else.
Finally, they turn to Hangman, who is just sitting there kind of
meekly. “Hangman, you haven’t said anything.”
Now, Hangman is under a curse because of some mischief he
got into when he was a young monkey and inadvertently disturbed
a yogi. Otherwise, he has all the power in the universe, since he
lives only to serve God. But he’s cursed to have no self-
consciousness of his own power (just as you, or I really have no
sense of our true inner power). One of his companions says,
“Hangman, you have the power to leap the ocean.”
He says, “Oh, I do? Oh yes, of course, I can jump over the
ocean.”
At that point, he starts to grow in size from just a regular
monkey into a huge, huge form. This is really just a symbol of the
leap of faith that each of us has to make, to have faith in ourselves
and faith in the universe, faith in the flow of things, to go beyond
ourselves.
Hangman leaps across the ocean as RAM’s messenger to locate
Site and reassure her that RAM has not forgotten her. Site, the
perfect devotee of RAM, represents all devotees. Hangman is
serving God by reminding the devotee to have faith—that God
cannot possibly forget us.
This is from William Buck’s version of the Ramayana:
In his mind Hangman had already crossed the sea and
entered the demon city. He climbed one of the Malaya hills
to get firm ground under his feet. He began to fill up with
power. He grew very large and heavy, and his tread pressed
down on the hill and crushed the caves of the serpents. Out
from the underworld came the richly dressed Nāgas [the
serpent gods], bruised and hissing, their hoods spread wide.
In their anger they rolled on the ground with tongues
flaming. They spat fire and bit the rocks in passion. Their
venom cracked the hill, and gleams of red metal and stone
shone from within the Earth.
Hangman climbed higher. With smiles of amazement, the
heavenly Gandhara [the astral musicians] and their
Apparatus rose half-dressed from the hill into the sky and
looked down to watch. Hangman climbed up through their
hillside parks, where Gandhara swords and bright-colored
robes were hung on trees, and golden wine cups and silver
dishes were on the ground in fair shady gardens hiding
lovers’ beds of lotus petals.
Hangman neared the summit. His feet squeezed water
from the hill. Rivers tumbled down, rock slides rolled, bright
fresh-broken veins of gold sparkled, tigers ran off and birds
flew away. The tree spirits fled, and in their dens the wild
cats yelled in a frightful chorus like the cry of the mountain
himself through the voice of all his animals.
Hangman stood on the hilltop. He held his breath and
sucked in his stomach. He frisked his tail and raised it a little
at the end. He bent his knees and swung back his arms, and
on one finger gleamed Rama’s gold ring [that he was taking
to Site]. Then without pausing to think he drew in his neck,
laid back his ears and jumped.
It was grand! It was the greatest leap ever taken. The
speed of Hangman’s jump pulled blossoms and flowers into
the air after him and they fell like little stars on the waving
treetops. The animals on the beach had never seen such a
thing; they cheered Hangman, then the air burned from his
passage, and red clouds flamed over the sky and Hangman
was far out of sight of land.
That white monkey was like a comet, pushing the sky
from his way and bumping clouds aside. The wind roared
under his arms and was pushed down from his breast as he
passed, and made the ocean pitch and roll. Sea spray rose and
steamed up the Sun. Beneath Hangman as he went, the green
salt water parted, and he could see the whales and fishes like
people surprised at home. The air around Hangman became
electric, and sheets of light gathered and crackled—blue, and
pale melon green, and flickering orange and red.
Halfway across to Lanka, the golden mountain Main aka
lived on the ocean floor, and from under sea he saw
Hangman coming and thought he would be tired….
“Rest awhile,” said Main aka. “Let me pay my ancient
debt to your father, the Wind.” …
“Forgive me, but I must not break my flight,” said
Hangman.
What a glorious leap! A leap into the unknown, a leap way beyond
Hangman’s capacity, a leap way beyond who he thought he was.
Your own leap—your leap into life, into death, into the next
moment, into freedom—comes from giving up the model of who
you think you are. Who are you? Are you a straight person? Are
you a clown? Have you been laughing forever? Have you been sad
long enough? Is it all very heavy and important? Or is it kind of
light and playful? How does this round work for you? It’s all wide
open this time. It’s all wide open.
On Hangman’s return, after he has found Site and leapt back
across the ocean, RAM praises and embraces him in a moment of
divine affection. Hangman, ever the humble servant, responds,
“Save me, save me (from the tentacles of egoism), my lord!”
RAM says, “As long as men shall speak of you, you will live on
Earth. No one can equal you. Your heart is true; your arms are
strong; you have the energy to do anything. You have served me
faithfully and done things for me that couldn’t be done.”
“It’s nothing,” said Hangman, “I am your friend, that’s all.”
Hangman is the connection between Shakti yoga, the yoga of
devotion, and karma yoga, the yoga of action and selfless service.
He can accomplish anything because of the purity of his love for
God. When he repeats RAM’s name, Hangman remembers who he
is, and when he does things in RAM’s name, nothing can stand in
his way. Serving as Hangman serves is a way of making your entire
life an offering, an act of devotion. For Hangman, each action is an
opportunity to place a flower at the feet of RAM, the Beloved.
Maharajah had us learn the “Hangman Chalía,” forty verses in
praise of Hangman. The opening of the “Hangman Chalía” (see
the invocation) inspired the title of this book. Krishna Was, who
has helped spread the Chalía in the West, says, “Chanting the
Chalía is a powerful way … to enter into the flow of Love and
Grace. In the Chalía, we bow to the great beauty, strength, and
devotion that Hangman embodies; we also begin to bow to that
place in ourselves. The Chalía inspires us to make the mirror of
our heart as clean as Hangman’s so that we can become aware of
the great beauty and love that lives within us as our own true
nature.”
Maharajah said Hangman is the breath of RAM.
Chapter 3
Karma Yoga, Living in the World
ONCE YOU GET that first glimpse of living Spirit, once your
heart opens even for a moment to unconditional love, everything in
your life becomes grist for the mill of your awakening. That
awakening is from ego consciousness, your limited self, to the
Self, the universal Spirit present in each of us, the God
consciousness. It’s such grace to share this path of the heart
together.
Although I went through a major transformation on my journey,
that’s not how the journey goes for everyone, nor is rapid
transformation necessary. For many people, their inner
transformation occurs through subtle changes over long periods of
time. In any case, it is a fallacy to think you’ll get closer to God by
changing the outer form of your life, by leaving your partner or
changing your job or moving to another place, by growing your
hair or cutting your hair or giving up your material possessions.
It is not the outer form that changes; it is the nature of the inner
being that fills the form. If you’re a lawyer, you go on being a
lawyer, but you begin to use being a lawyer as a way of coming to
God. One form is no more spiritual than any other. The essential
work of developing a spiritual consciousness is quieting the mind
and opening the heart.
YOUR KARMA IS YOUR DHARMA
The game of enlightenment starts from exactly where you are in
your life at this moment. It’s not about rejecting or walking away
from any part of your life. The game is to bring all of your life into
harmony at every level, to act according to dharma, the law of the
universe, truth, how it all is.
Your karma is what you are given to do in your life, based on
past actions. Making a spiritual practice out of your karma, using it
to go to God, is what brings karma into dharma, life into harmony
with the spirit. From a spiritual standpoint, the intent and the
manner of doing something are more important than the act itself.
When you bring all of your life into harmony at every level, you
act in accord with dharma. Another way to say it is you’re doing
God’s will.
All forms of yoga are ways of coming into union with God.
Karma yoga is putting all the activity of your life—work,
relationships, service—toward consummating that union. How you
go about your work in the world determines whether your work is a
vehicle for your spiritual awakening or for getting more caught in
Maya, increasing the illusion of separation. Karma yoga uses
selfless action and service as a way of bringing your life into
harmony with the One.
In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna tells Arjuna to do what he does,
but to offer the fruits of his actions to him, to Krishna, to God. To
use your daily life and work as a conscious spiritual path means
relinquishing your attachment to the fruits of the actions, to how
they come out. Instead of doing it for a reward or a result, you do
your work as an offering, out of love for God. Through love for
God, your work becomes an expression of devotion, of Shakti.
Loving service to others is also a way of offering your work to
God. In the Ramayana, Hangman expresses his devotion through
his service to RAM. Hangman exemplifies that combination of
Shakti (devotion) and karma yoga (service). Hangman personifies
Khalil Gibran’s statement, “Work is love made visible.” Like
Hangman, you serve others as a way of honoring God. It’s an
attitude you develop, an attitude of offering. Every action you
perform, you offer as selfless service, “sea” in Sanskrit. In the
same vein, Christ says about service, “What you do for the least of
my brothers and sisters you do for me.”
Sea doesn’t have ego in it; it’s all soul. Any action can be sea.
Everything you do—cooking, working, gardening—is an act you
can offer to God. Offering your work and all your actions to God
takes daily life out of the realm of ego and into the higher Self.
Karma yoga is a great practice, especially for us Westerners who
are so addicted to doing, because it opens us to being even while
we’re doing. Letting go of the doer lightens your load. It’s not even
your load anymore. “Not my will, but Thy Will.”
I slept and dreamt that life was joy.
I awoke and saw that life was service.
Furthermore, I acted and behold, service was joy.
RABINDRANATH TAGORE
Find someone or something that needs help, and help out. Work on
yourself to make it a conscious act of sea. Gandhi said, “The act
that you do may seem very insignificant, but it’s important that
you do it.”
Another term for karma yoga is “right action.” In the West the
concept of right action is a difficult one to hear because it runs
counter to our achievement and goal-oriented culture. In India,
they have a very deep sense of doing one’s dharma. From that
view, it’s natural to attune yourself to be in harmony with the laws
of the universe. Your life is the part you play. You go from being
the star of your own show to becoming an actor in the divine play.
That Bhagavad Gita instruction to be unattached to the fruits of
your actions is the key. If you are a parent raising a child, don’t get
attached to the act of raising the child. That doesn’t mean you’re
not a loving, active parent. Your job is to love and nurture, feed
and clothe, take care and guard the safety of the child, and guide
him or her with your moral compass. But how the child turns out is
how the child turns out. Ultimately he or she is not your child; who
they turn out to be is up to God and their own karma.
Your attachment, your clinging to how the child is going to turn
out, affects every aspect of how you parent. A lot of our anxiety
comes because we are attached to how a child is supposed to come
out—smart, successful, creative, whatever it is we want for our
child. Of course, you parent your child as impeccably as you can.
“Parent” is your role to play because that is your dharma, and
naturally you become immersed in your role in life. But it is also
important to remember you’re a soul playing a role. Who your
child is and who you are not roles.
As a conscious being, you do all you can to live in your soul and
to create a space for others to be in their soul too. But you do so
without trying to change the existing karma. You don’t need to
change your karma, only your attachment to it. Attachment is what
keeps you stuck in your limited reality. Your attachment, wishing
your loved ones to be different than they are, keeps them the same.
Just allow them to be the way they are and love them. Then they
may change. But it’s not up to you. Samuel Johnson said, “He who
has so little knowledge of human nature, as to seek happiness by
changing anything but his own disposition, will waste his life in
fruitless efforts.”
Just keep working on yourself until you are radiating love for
each of the beings in your life. When you are radiating love, then
everybody else is free to give up their stuff when they’re ready to
give it up. Like a skillful gardener, you create a space for people to
grow when they’re ready to grow. As a parent you create the
garden for a child to grow (that’s why they call it kindergarten),
but you don’t grow the flower. You cultivate and fertilize the earth
and keep it weeded and moist, and then the flower grows naturally.
WITNESSING YOUR OWN MELLOW DRAMA
The essence of karma yoga is to free yourself from attachments to
the events of your life, to stop creating more karma that gets you
more stuck, and to get free of your existing karma. The minute
your awareness grasps at anything, whether through attraction or
aversion, you create karma from that link between awareness and
the acts (or thoughts or emotions) that follow from the desire or
the aversion. Action arising from awareness not identified with
attraction or aversion creates no karma. Karma is the residual
effect of an attached act. No attachment, no karma.
The Great Way is not difficult
for those not attached to preferences.
When neither love nor hate arises
all is clear and undisguised.
Separate by the smallest amount, however, and you are as far from it as heaven is from earth.
If you wish to know the truth,
then hold to no opinions for or against anything.
To set up what you like against what you dislike
is the disease of the mind.
When the fundamental nature of things is not recognized
the mind’s essential peace is disturbed to no avail.
…
When you try to stop activity to achieve quietude
your very effort fills you with activity.
…
Do not remain in a dualistic state
avoid such easy habits carefully.
If you attach even to a trace
of this and that, of right and wrong,
the Mind-essence will be lost in confusion.
Although all dualities arise from the One,
do not be attached even to ideas of this One.
When the mind exists undisturbed in the Way,
there is no objection to anything in the world,
and when there is no objection to anything,
things cease to be—in the old way.

SENT’AN, FROM SIN-HSIN MING, VERSES ON THE FAITH-MIND
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD B. CLARKE
One way to get free of attachment is to cultivate the witness
consciousness, to become a neutral observer of your own life. The
witness place inside you is simple awareness, the part of you that is
aware of everything—just noticing, watching, not judging, just
being present, being here now.
The witness is actually another level of consciousness. The
witness coexists alongside your normal consciousness as another
layer of awareness, as the part of you that is awakening. Humans
have this unique ability to be in two states of consciousness at
once. Witnessing yourself is like directing the beam of a flashlight
back at itself. In any experience—sensory, emotional, or
conceptual—there’s the experience, the sensory or emotional or
thought data, and there’s your awareness of it. That’s the witness,
the awareness, and you can cultivate that awareness in the garden
of your being.
The witness is your awareness of your own thoughts, feelings,
and emotions. Witnessing is like waking up in the morning and
then looking in the mirror and noticing yourself—not judging or
criticizing, just neutrally observing the quality of being awake.
That process of stepping back takes you out of being submerged in
your experiences and thoughts and sensory input and into self-awareness.
Along with that self-awareness comes the subtle joy of just
being here, alive, enjoying being present at this moment.
Eventually, floating in that subjective awareness, the objects of
awareness dissolve, and you will come into the spiritual Self, the
Atman, which is pure consciousness, joy, compassion, the One.
The witness is your centering device. It guides the work you do
on yourself. Once you understand that there is a place in you that is
not attached, you can extricate yourself from attachments. Pretty
much everything we notice in the universe is a reflection of our
attachments.
Jesus warned us, “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon
earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt … For where your treasure
is, there will your heart be also.” Desire creates your universe;
that’s just the way it works. So your first job is to work on
yourself. The greatest thing you can do for another human being is
to get your own house in order and find your true spiritual heart.
After meditating for some years, I began to see the patterns of
my own behavior. As you quiet your mind, you begin to see the
nature of your own resistance, your sickness, more clearly. You
see the mental struggles, inner dialogues, self-narrations, the ways
you procrastinate or resist life changes. Don’t try to change the
patterns; just notice them. As you cultivate the witness, things
change. You don’t have to change them. When you’re being here
now, in loving awareness, things just change.
By cultivating the witness consciousness, you move your
identification from your ego to your soul. Your soul is in your
spiritual heart. The soul witnesses the incarnation. If you stay in
the witness, your soul witnesses your feelings, your desires, your
experiences, not identifying with those desires or attitudes or any
of those things. Then you can just watch the show. Sit back from
your ego and your other thoughts and just watch the show of your
incarnation like a movie, enjoying the characters and loving the
melodrama. It turns out how it turns out. I like to sit back with my
guru inside my heart. He is a loving and compassionate, peaceful
and wise soul friend. You also can have a soul friend—inside
yourself—a guru or a good spiritual friend to keep you oriented
toward God.
Think of the witness as your inner guru, silently illuminating
the workings of your mind. There is this quiet place, this conscious
entity that’s hanging around and showing you, “Oh, you just got
uptight.” Not judging, as in, “You’re such a failure, you fool. You
got uptight again,” but just, “OK, you got uptight again. How
interesting!”
The quickest way to get through your stuff is to learn to listen to
that place inside. The inner guru is always there for you once you
recognize it. You have to honor your own path and be able to trust
that there is a place in you that knows what is best. There is a
tendency to look to others for guidance, but really only you know
what is suitable for you. Trust your intuitive heart. The Quakers
call it the still, small voice within. When it speaks, listen. If, as
you listen to your heart’s intuition, it feels right to do something,
do it.
Witnessing is a doorway to living in your spiritual heart, your
soul awareness. The more you listen to your internal witness, the
more you stop living by other people’s judgments and
expectations. You start doing what you need to do. In trying to
decide what to do with your life, listen to your heart. The more you
live in your spiritual heart, the more you see yourself and others
from the soul perspective. Seeing things as a soul changes
everything. The program is much farther out than you think. I
never thought I’d be a yogi.
Each of us has our own unique karmic predicament, our own
unique work to do. The predicament is that there is nowhere to
stand, because our identification with the person who has the
karma is changing too. As you develop the witness and identify
more with your spiritual heart, karma just is. As you awaken, you
realize that personal karma is just another illusion. The illusion is
that this is the only reality. The witness helps you to see that there
are choices, different ways to perceive reality.
When you are pouring morning tea or pouring the water into the
coffee-maker for your family, is that all it is? Or is it God pouring
God into God to serve God? Always choose what you feel is most
at one with the Way of things, the Tao, your dharma.
IT’S ALL IN THE FAMILY
Back in the ’70s we put out a boxed set of records called Love,
Serve, Remember. It was a really nice box, with six records and a
beautiful booklet with text and photos and drawings. My father, the
lawyer and CEO, looked at it and said, “This is pretty good. How
much do you sell it for?” I told him we sold it for just a little more
than it cost to produce. He said, “You know, you could charge
much more for this. It’s worth it, and you could make more
money.”
I asked Dad how much he charged Uncle Henry when he
represented him in a legal matter. He replied, “Well, of course I
didn’t charge him anything. That’s Uncle Henry. He’s family.” I
said that was my dilemma too—I see everyone as Uncle Henry.
The way I see it, we are all one family. Now, whether I can actually
live so everybody is my family and we are all one depends on how
trapped I am in my separateness, and whether I see others as “us”
or as “them.” Of course, how you see others starts with how you
see yourself. Who you think you are is a matter of perspective. I
like the story about a disreputable-looking Sufi named Hardin,
who is attempting to do some business in a bank. The bank teller
asks him if he can identify himself. He pulls out a mirror and says,
“Yep, that’s me.”
Don’t take your melodrama so seriously. Let’s remember who
we really are—that is, souls, not egos. The ego is who you think
you are. Who you think you are will die with the body because it’s
part of this incarnation. But your soul, which has these qualities of
deep wisdom and love and peace and joy, is just here, watching it
all go by.
Again, karma yoga is not about renouncing external actions but
about renouncing your attachment to them. We’re really talking
about giving up being the central character of your own
melodrama, who you think you are and how you think it is. All this
self-narration of the ego is what keeps your personal melodrama
going.
Ego is neither good nor bad. The ego has a function. It is the
vehicle through which you relate to the external world. But the ego
is a collection of thoughts, and to the extent you identify with your
thoughts, they keep you from being here now. Once you let go of
the identification with your thoughts the melodrama goes on, but
it’s no longer your melodrama. Appreciate the experiences but
don’t get caught in them.
The art of spiritual growth has to do with how quickly you
recognize attachments and how quickly you can release them. If
you can admit that you can’t see or hear clearly because of
attachment, then the full wisdom of things will begin to shine
through. As long as you have some desire about how you think it
ought to be, you can’t hear how it is.
A Zen story about a monk living in a monastery in the hills
above a town exemplifies life without attachment. A local girl got
pregnant by a fisherman, but she didn’t want to get the fisherman
in trouble, so she said the monk on the hill was the father. The
townspeople went up to the monastery with torches, and they
knocked on the gate. The monk opened the gate, and they said,
“This is your baby. You must raise it.” The monk said, “AAH, so.”
And he took the baby and closed the gates. Nine years later, the girl
was dying but didn’t want to die without confessing this terrible
injustice, so she told the people. They were mortified, and they
went rushing up and knocked on the gate. The monk opened the
gate, and they said, “We’re terribly sorry. It wasn’t your son.
We’ve come to relieve you of this responsibility.” And he said,
“AAH, so.”
RELATIONSHIPS AND EMOTIONS
From the soul’s point of view, you come to appreciate that each
one of us is living out his or her own karma. We interact together,
and those interactions are the grist for each other’s mill of
awakening. From a personality point of view, you develop
judgment, but from the soul’s point of view, you develop
appreciation. This shift from judging to appreciating—to
appreciating yourself and what your karmic predicament is, and
who other beings are with their own karma—brings everything into
a simple loving awareness. To be free means to open your heart
and you're being to the fullness of who you are, because only when
you are resting in the place of unity can you truly honor and
appreciate others and the incredible diversity of the universe.
When I perform a wedding ceremony, the image I invoke is of a
triangle formed by the two partners and this third force, which is
the shared love that unites and surrounds them both. In the yoga of
relationship, two people come together to find that shared love but
continue to dance as two. In that union, both people are separate
and yet not separate. Their relationship feeds both their unique
individuality and their unity of consciousness. Love can open the
way to surrendering into oneness. It gets extraordinarily beautiful
when there’s no more “me” and “you,” and it becomes just “us.”
Taken to a deeper level, when compassion is fully developed,
you are not looking at others as “them.” You’re listening and
experiencing and letting that intuitive part of you merge with the
other person, and you’re feeling their pain or joy or hope or fear in
yourself. Then it’s no longer “us” and “them”; it’s just “us.”
Practice this in your relationships with others.
At a certain point, you realize that you see only the projections
of your own mind. The play of phenomena is a projection of the
spirit. The projections are your karma, your curriculum for this
incarnation. Everything that’s happening to you is a teaching
designed to burn out your stuff, your attachments. Your humanity
and all your desires are not some kind of error. They’re integral
parts of the journey.
One way of getting to this place of compassionate action is by
honoring others and being patient. Look at the people you don’t
like and see them as an exercise for you to open your spiritual
heart and to develop your compassion. The quieter you are, the
more you hear the true nature of compassion. The intuitive
compassionate heart is the doorway to our unity.
This story from Aikido master Terry Dobson is one of my
favorites because it shows how to bring about harmony by
embracing conflict with compassion and understanding:
The train clanked and rattled through the suburbs of Tokyo
on a drowsy spring afternoon. Our car was comparatively
empty, a few housewives with their kids in tow, some old
folks going shopping. I gazed absently at the drab houses and
dusty hedgerows.
At one station the doors opened, and suddenly the
afternoon quiet was shattered by a man bellowing violent,
incomprehensible curses. The man staggered into our car. He
wore laborer’s clothing, and he was big, drunk, and dirty.
Screaming, he swung at a woman holding a baby. The blow
sent her spinning into the laps of an elderly couple. It was a
miracle the baby was unharmed. Terrified, the couple
jumped up and scrambled toward the end of the car. The
laborer aimed a kick at the retreating back of the old woman
but missed as she scuttled to safety. This so enraged the
drunk that he grabbed the metal pole in the center of the car
and tried to wrench it out of its stanchion. I could see that
one of his hands was cut and bleeding. The train lurched
ahead, the passengers frozen with fear. I stood up.
I was young then, some twenty years ago, and in pretty
good shape. I had been putting in a solid eight hours of
aikido training every day for the past three years. I liked to
throw and grapple. I thought I was tough. The trouble was,
my martial skill was untested in actual combat. As students
of aikido, we were not allowed to fight. Aikido, my teacher
had said again and again, is the art of reconciliation.
Whoever has the mind to fight has broken his connection to
the universe. If you try to dominate people, you are already
defeated. We study how to resolve conflict, not how to start
it.
I listened to his words. I tried so hard. Furthermore, I even went so far
as to cross the street to avoid the kids, the pinball punks who
lounged around the train station. My forbearance exalted me.
I was both tough and holy. In my heart, however, I wanted an
absolutely legitimate opportunity whereby I might save the
innocent by destroying the guilty. This is it, I said to myself,
as I stood up. People are in danger. If I don’t do something
fast, somebody will probably get hurt.
Seeing me stand up the drunk recognized the chance to
focus his rage. “Aha!” he roared. “A foreigner! You need a
lesson in Japanese manners.” I held on lightly to the
commuter strap overhead and gave him a slow look of
disgust and dismissal. I planned to take this turkey apart, but
he had to make the first move. I wanted him mad, so I pursed
my lips and blew him an insolent kiss. “All right,” he
hollered, “You’re going to get a lesson.” He gathered himself
for a rush at me.
A fraction of a second before he could move, someone
shouted “Hey!” It was ear-splitting. I remember the
strangely joyous, lilting quality of it as though you and a
friend had been searching diligently for something, and he
had suddenly stumbled upon it—“Hey!” I wheeled to my
left, the drunk spun to his right.
We both stared down at a little old Japanese man. He
must have been well into his seventies, this tiny gentleman,
sitting there immaculate in his kimono. He took no notice of
me but beamed delightedly at the laborer as though he had a
most important, most welcome secret to share. “Come here,”
the old man said in an easy vernacular, beckoning to the
drunk. “Come here and talk with me.” He waved his hand
lightly. The big man followed as if on a string. He planted
his feet belligerently in front of the old gentleman and roared
above the clacking wheels. “Why the hell should I talk to
you?”
The drunk now had his back to me. If his elbow moved so
much as a millimeter I’d drop him in his socks. The old man
continued to beam at the laborer. “What do you been drinking?”
he asked, his eyes sparkling with interest. “I’ve been
drinking sake,” the laborer bellowed back, “and it’s none of
your business.” Flecks of spittle spattered the old man. “Oh,
that’s wonderful,” the old man said, “absolutely wonderful.
You see I love sake too. Every night me and my wife, she’s
seventy-six you know, we warm up a little bottle of sake, and
we take it out in the garden, and we sit on our old wooden
bench, and we watch the sun go down, and we look to see how
our persimmon tree is doing. My great-grandfather planted
that tree, and we worry about whether it will recover from
those ice storms we had last winter. Our tree has done better
than I expected though, especially when you consider the
poor quality of the soil. It is gratifying to watch when we
take our sake and go out to enjoy the evening even when it
rains.” He looked up at the laborer, his eyes twinkling.
As he struggled to follow the old man’s conversation, the
drunk’s face began to soften. His fists slowly unclenched.
“Yeah,” he said, “I love persimmons too.” His voice trailed
off. “Yes,” said the old man, smiling, “and I am sure you
have a wonderful wife.” “Nah. My wife died.” Very gently,
swaying with the motion of the train, the big man began to
sob. “I don’t got any wife. I don’t got any home. I don’t got any
job. I’m so ashamed of myself.” Tears rolled down his
cheeks. A spasm of despair rippled through his body.
There I was standing in my well-scrubbed youthful
innocence, my make-this-world-safe-for-democracy
righteousness. I suddenly felt dirtier than he was. The train
arrived at my stop. As the door opened, I heard the old man
cluck sympathetically. “My, my,” he said, “that is a difficult
predicament. Sit down here and tell me about it.” I turned
my head for one last look. The laborer was sprawled on the
seat, his head in the old man’s lap. The old man was softly
stroking the filthy matted hair. As the train pulled away, I sat
down on a bench. What I had wanted to do with muscle had
been accomplished with kind words. I had just seen aikido
tried in combat, and the essence of it was love.
You and I are in training to become conscious, compassionate
beings, in the truest and deepest sense. Become an instrument of
joy, an instrument of equanimity, an instrument of presence, an
instrument of love, an instrument of availability, and at the same
moment absolutely quiet. Since we all spend so much time in our
relationships, why not turn them into a yoga for getting free?
Living a spiritual life is a strategy for working on yourself for the
benefit of all beings. That’s another way of saying that the
optimum thing you can do for someone else is to work on yourself
—not out of some idealistic sense of altruism, but because getting
to oneness for yourself means resolving your sense of separateness
to where we’re all family.
Use every situation you have with other people as a vehicle to
work on yourself. See where you get stuck, where you push, where
you grab, where you judge, where you do all the other stuff. Use
your life experiences as your curriculum.
When I look at relationships, my own and others, I see a whole
range of reasons we get together and ways we interact. Some are
transactional, but the deeper impulse of every human relationship
is to evoke the love and oneness that unites us. But what actually
happens is that many relationships reinforce our separateness
because of our misperception of ourselves as separate beings, and
because of our desire systems, which are based on separateness or
ego. Relationships only work in a spiritual sense when you and I
really see that we are one.
Relationships and emotions can reinforce our separateness, or
they can be grist for the mill of awakening. When it comes to love
relationships we are like bees looking for a flower. The
predicament is that the emotional power of loving somebody can
get you so caught in the interpersonal melodrama that you can’t get
beyond the emotion. The problem with interpersonal love is that
you are dependent on the other person to reflect love back to you.
That’s part of the illusion of separateness. The reality is that love
is a state of being that comes from within.
The only thing you really ever have to offer another person is
your own state of being. When you’re not entrapped by another
person’s appearance or behavior, you can see behind all that to a
deeper level of their being because your mind has tuned itself;
you’ve shifted your focus just that little bit to see their soul. That
soul quality is love.
When I was growing up, I used to be somebody. We were all in
somebody training in those days. You become somebody, and then
you tell everybody who you are. You hand out business cards, and
you say, “How do you do? I am Somebody, and I do such and
such.” Everybody is very important and special, and each person
assesses how much more important they are than everybody else.
We were all in that training.
I became somebody because my parents wanted me to be
special, and my educators wanted me to be special, and they trained
me how to do that. It’s called ego structuring. I really made it. I
was really somebody. My parents were proud of me. I could look
in their eyes and see pride and appreciation. That part was very
gratifying.
The only problem was, inside I felt lousy. I felt like somehow I
should be happy. But I wasn’t. I thought, “Well, happiness isn’t
everything, is it? As long as I am what everyone wants me to be,
isn’t that enough?” But it wasn’t, and I felt very weird.
There is a story I’ve told many times that describes that feeling
of weirdness. A man wanted to have a suit made. So he went to the
best tailor in town, who was named Zumba ch. Zumba ch took his
measurements and ordered the best material.
The man went in for the final fitting, and he put on the suit. One
sleeve was two inches longer than the other. He said, “Zumba ch, I
don’t want to complain. It’s a beautiful suit. But this sleeve is two
inches longer than that sleeve.” Zumba ch looked affronted. He
said, “There’s nothing wrong with the suit. It’s the way you are
standing.” And he pushed one of the man’s shoulders down and the
other one up, and he said, “See, if you stand like that it fits
perfectly.”
The fellow looked in the mirror again, and there was all this
loose material behind the collar. He said, “Zumba ch, what’s all this
material sticking out?” Zumba ch said, “There is nothing wrong
with that suit. It’s the way you are standing.” And he pushed in the
man’s chin and made him hunch his shoulders. “See, it’s perfect.”
Finally, the suit was fitting perfectly, and the man left. He was
walking to the bus in his new, perfectly fitting suit, and somebody
came up to him and said, “What a beautiful suit! I bet Zumba ch the
tailor made it.”
The man said, “How did you know?”
“Because only a tailor of Zumba ch’s skill could make a suit fit
so perfectly on somebody as crippled as you are.”
Well, that was what I felt like. Everybody kept telling me what
a beautiful suit I was wearing, but I felt like I was in Zumba ch’s
suit.
Wearing Zumba ch’s suit is sort of what you feel like in some
relationships. When you take off the suit and start to see behind the
veils, it’s as if you’re looking at someone and saying, “Are you
here? I’m here. Here we are. Far out!”
If somebody at work is a problem for you, they’re not the one
who needs to change. If someone is a problem for you, it’s you
who needs to change. If you feel they’re causing you trouble, that’s
your problem. It’s on you. Your job is to clear yourself.
If they’re creating a problem for themselves, that’s their karma.
When Christ was being crucified, and he said, “Forgive them, for
they know not what they do,” he was trying to help others out of
being a problem for themselves. They weren’t a problem for him,
because he was clear.
Ideally you clear yourself right in the situation, but often it’s
too sticky and you can’t do it. Step back then and do the practices
you do in the morning and evening or on weekends to stay clear.
Do the stuff that quiets you down inside.
Next time you go into that work situation, you may lose it
again. Just go home and see how you lost it, examine it. You go in
the next day and lose it again. You start keeping a diary of, “How
did I lose it today?” Then you go and do it again. After a while,
when you’re starting to lose it, you don’t buy in so much. You start
to watch the mechanics of what it is that makes you lose it all the
time. When you get to the point of seeing stuff as it’s actually
happening, the tendrils of attachment will begin to loosen.
If you don’t appreciate me, that’s your problem. If I need your
love or your approval, then it’s my problem. Then my needs are
giving you power over me. But it’s not your power—it’s the power
of my desire system. The power other people have to shake you out
of your equanimity and love and consciousness has to do with your
own attachments and the clinging of your mind.
This is where your work is on yourself, where you need to
meditate more, where you need to reflect more, where you need a
deeper philosophical framework. It’s where you need to cultivate
the witness more. It’s where you need to practice opening your
heart more in circumstances that aren’t optimum or easy. This is
your work. You were given a heavy curriculum, a full course load.
This is it. There’s no blame; you’re not being graded. It’s just
what’s on your plate at this moment.
Using relationships as a vehicle to freedom means we have to
learn to listen—listen to each person at each level of their being.
The art of listening comes from a quiet mind and an open heart.
Listening uses all of your senses, and it is a subtle skill. Listen, just
listen—not only with the ear, but also with your being. Your being
becomes the instrument of listening. Your sensing mechanisms in
life are not just your ears, eyes, skin, and analytic mind. It’s
something deeper, some intuitive quality of knowing. With all of
your being, you become an antenna to the nature of another person.
Then for the relationship to remain as living spirit, one of the best
ingredients to put into the stew is truth.
TRUTH WILL SET YOU FREE
Gandhi spent his life in what he called “experiments in truth,” just
learning how to be truthful. He said, “Only God knows absolute
Truth,” and further, that he, being human, knew only relative truth,
and that his understanding of it changed from day to day. Gandhi
said that his commitment was to truth, not to consistency. It is
important to honor your own truth even though to other people you
may appear to be inconsistent. In a speech to the Muslim world,
President Barack Obama quoted from the Koran, “Be conscious of
God and always speak the truth.” Compassionate use of truth
requires discriminating wisdom, which comes from awareness of
God within.
For a long time I thought truth was expressed in words, but
that’s not always so. There are truths that are communicated only
in silence. You have to know when to use words and when to use
silence. There is a difference between paranoid silence and cosmic
silence. Cosmic silence is a plane of consciousness that cannot be
expressed in words. From that place, words are like a finger
pointing at the moon. Silence is a luxury we can afford when we
feel safe together in shared awareness.
When I went to India for the second time, I brought Maharajah
a copy of the book Be Here Now. I didn’t hear anything for a while,
then one day he called me up to where he was sitting and said,
“You’re printing lies in this book.”
I said, “Oh no, Maharajah. Everything in the book is true.”
He said, “It says here that Hard Days Baba went into the jungle
when he was eight years old.” (You may recall that Hard Days Baba
was assigned by Maharajah to teach me yoga.) Maharajah said,
“He didn’t go into the jungle when he was eight years old. He
worked in the Forestry Department until 1962.”
Then he called a man over and asked, “What do you do?”
The man said, “I am the head of the Forestry Department.”
Maharajah said, “Do you know Hard Days Baba?”
He said, “Oh yes, he worked for me until 1962.”
Maharajah said, “OK, go.”
Then in similar fashion he showed me a couple of more
fallacies in two more paragraphs, and he said, “Why did you write
that?”
I said, “Well, somebody told me all that stuff. I don’t know who
told it to me, but somebody did, and it was somebody around you.
And I believed it because it was all coming with love.”
He said, “Are you so simple that you believe everything
everybody tells you?”
Hard Days Baba was a beautiful silent yogi, and he was just
being who he was. Maybe I’d developed this trip about him and
listened to it because I wanted my teacher to be special.
Maharajah said, “Whatever the reason, it’s a lie. What are you
going to do about it?”
I said, “Well Maharajah, I’ll change it. Eighty thousand copies
are already distributed, and I can’t call them back. But the second
printing is coming up, and I will change it then.”
I sent a telegram to the Lama Foundation, which was printing
the book in Albuquerque. I told them to please delete the two
paragraphs about Hard Days Baba in the next printing. Steve
Durfee, the then-head of Lama who is now called Our al Din,
wrote back and said, “It can’t be done now. I was just in
Albuquerque”—which is a couple of hundred miles from Lama,
where there’s no phone—“I told them to go ahead and print it, and
they were going to press that day.” It was the pre-Christmas rush,
and it was probably already printed. Steve said, “I received your
telegram too late. We will change it in the third edition, which will
be printed in three months.”
I went back to my guru and I said, “Maharajah, I can’t change it
until the next edition. To change it now would cost at least
$10,000. We would have to throw away the whole printing.”
He looked at me, and he said, “Do it now.” And he said, “Money
and truth have nothing to do with one another.”
I went back and cabled Lama again and said, “Forget the
expense. Maharajah says change it now. It’s his book.”
A cable came back from Steve saying, “The most remarkable
thing happened. The day your cable came telling us to change it
anyway, a note came from the printing company. When they put
the job on the press, one of the plates was damaged. That page
included a photo of Maharajah, and when they went to the file to
find the original, that particular picture was missing. It was the
only thing missing. So they took the whole job off the press and
wrote for further instructions.”
Money and truth have nothing to do with one another. Sahara-
I was playing with the book and the printer and my mind.
The Tao Te Ching says, “Truth waits for eyes unclouded by
longing.” Often we don’t fully hear the truth because of our mind’s
clinging or attachment; we hear only the projections of our own
desires. So again, and again we make decisions that end up not
being in the deepest harmony with the Way of things. Working
through an attachment means you have to work with that desire
until you are no longer attached to that desire. The desire may still
be there, but you are no longer attached to it.
When we see without attachment, truth becomes self-evident.
When we are fully present at the moment, truth just is.
WORKING WITH YOUR EMOTIONS
One way to heal your emotional problems is to cultivate another
part of your being, like the witness. Use the witness to cultivate
awareness in dealing with emotions one by one. As the witness gets
stronger, your emotional problems become less relevant to your
existence.
By witnessing, you can divest emotions of their power. When
you’re deep in the psychological realm, and you keep trying to
work it out, you just keep investing in it. It’s a bottomless well of
stuff.
Witnessing will allow you to acknowledge the feelings and
appreciate them as part of the human condition. That’s the quickest
way through an emotion: to acknowledge it, allow it to be, and
release it, give it up. You can do that in a variety of ways. For
example, you can use the body energy of hath yoga to keep
working out the chemical stuff and the tension that builds up in the
body. Sometimes music helps, or just becoming aware of your
breath. Just keep letting go and letting go. Singing to God—as in
the practice known as Kiran—can give rise to ecstatic states that
have the power to free you from your personal emotional
melodramas.
As your spiritual practice gets stronger, you are able to see your
emotional stuff before it gets so overloaded and invested with
adrenalin. You no longer let it get that intense. If those feelings get
out of control, the best thing to do is to sit quietly. Let them pass.
Bhagavān Was once said to me, “Emotions are like waves. Watch
them disappear in the distance on the vast calm ocean.”
That capacity to dwell in the witness makes all the emotional
stuff and stresses of life much lighter. The art, as I understand it, is
to cultivate these other planes of consciousness, and then you no
longer have to push the stuff away because it falls into perspective.
It’s as if you just shift your focus and see it from outside
yourself, so you are no longer identified with the way you were
thinking. Einstein said, “The significant problems we have cannot
be solved at the same level of thinking with which we created
them.’’
On the devotional path, you can change levels by offering an
emotion to God or your guru as a way to give it up. “Here, you take
it. I offer it to you.” And by appreciating your own humanity:
“Yeah, here I am. I just lost it again. Ah, so. Right. OK.” It’s the
ability to see it without denying it. “I’m upset. Far out. Here we are
again.” It is like talking with God and saying, “Look how
deliciously human I am.”
When I studied people’s personalities in psychology, I saw that
at the root of almost every problem was a feeling of inadequacy or
not-roughness. These are the seed components in personality
structure. Understand these issues and see that you’re subject to
that pathology just like everyone else. That wisdom leads to
compassion and love for yourself and others.
Go behind your own polarities too—not to “I am good” or “I am
loveable,” but go behind them to “I am.” “I am” includes the fact
that I do beautiful things and I do crappy things. And I am. As you
start to rest in the space of “I am,” you begin to feel emotions from
a different perspective and become impeccable in the way you play
the game. Loving those emotions helps to release them.
When you hunger for love, that is the longing to come home, to
be at peace, to feel at one with the universe, where lover and
Beloved merge. It’s a place to be fully at the moment, to feel
completely fulfilled, to just be in love.
I’D RATHER BE THAN BE RIGHT
Watch how your mind judges. Judgment comes, in part, out of your
own fear. You judge other people because you’re not comfortable
in your own being. By judging, you find out where you stand in
relation to other people. The judging mind is very divisive. It
separates. Separation closes your heart. If you close your heart to
someone, you are perpetuating your suffering and theirs. Shifting
out of judgment means learning to appreciate your predicament
and their predicament with an open heart instead of judging. Then
you can allow yourself and others to just be, without separation.
The only game in town is the game of being, which includes
both highs and lows. Every time you push something away, it
remains there. The pile under the rug gets very big. Your lows turn
out to be more interesting than your highs because they are
showing you where you’re not, where you have work to do.
You just say, “Thank you for the teaching.” You don’t have to
judge another being. You just have to work on yourself.
When somebody provokes your anger, the only reason you get
angry is that you’re holding on to how you think something is
supposed to be. You’re denying how it is. Then you see it’s the
expectations of your own mind that are creating your own hell.
When you get frustrated because something isn’t the way you
thought it would be, examine the way you thought, not just the
thing that frustrates you. You’ll see that a lot of your emotional
suffering is created by your models of how you think the universe
should be and your inability to allow it to be as it is.
Maharajah told me to love everyone. “Love everyone, there is
only one. Sub EK—it’s all one, just love everyone. See God
everywhere. Just love everyone. Don’t get angry. Ram Days, don’t
get angry. Love everyone, tell the truth, love everyone, don’t get
angry.”
You know, when people say things like that to you, you say,
“Yeah, sure, right, absolutely!” And it sort of goes through you like
Chinese food because you’ve been told that since you were a child.
I had just returned to India after two years as a holy man in the
West. It had been too heavy a trip for me because I was still full of
lust and greed and laziness. There were so many more pizzas I still
had to eat, and it was hard to sneak in a pizza when somebody was
always looking. Finally, I had fled back to India, hoping to hide out
in a cave until I could get my head together. But all the time in
India, wherever I would go there were Westerners wanting to hang
out. Slowly I grew to hate them all. How could I go into a cave and
get holy with forty Westerners?
After a year, except for a couple of weeks, I remained totally
immersed in Western consciousness in the middle of India. We
were all with Maharajah, and finally I decided, “Well, he keeps
saying tell the truth and don’t get angry, but the truth is I am angry.
I have spent too long outwardly pretending I love everyone. Inside
my mind is full of anger. The hypocrisy is driving me up the wall.
Maharajah said to tell the truth. I think for a change I will tell the
truth, since I can’t do both.”
People would come to visit me in my room. They were lovely
beings, and I would say, “Get the hell out of this room, you lazy
bastard. You’re too nice. You nauseate me.” Pretty soon I had
effectively alienated the entire group. They didn’t want to take me
seriously, but I was persistent. At that time I was doing a Sahara,
a practice, where I didn’t touch money. To get to the temple every
day from town, we usually shared a bus or a taxi, and somebody
would pay for me. But I was so mad at everybody that I couldn’t be
in the same space with them on the bus. So I walked to the temple,
which took several hours.
One day I got there late, having walked, and I was furious.
Everyone was sitting in the courtyard across from Maharajah
eating the blessed food, the Prasad. There was one leaf plate left
for me. One of the guys I was particularly angry at brought the
food over and put it down in front of me. I was so angry I picked it
up and threw it at him. Maharajah was watching all of this and
called me over. “Ram Days, is something troubling you?”
“Yes. I can’t stand dharma, I can’t stand impurities. I can’t
stand all those people, and I can’t stand myself. I only love you. Furthermore, I
hate everybody else.”
At that point I started to wail—to just cry and cry as if all the
anger in me was just pouring out of me. Maharajah sent for some
milk, and he was feeding me milk and patting me on the head and
pulling my beard, and he was crying along with me. And then he
looked at me, and he said, “Love everyone and don’t get angry.”
I said to him, “Well, you told me to tell the truth, and the truth
is I don’t love everyone.”
He leaned close to me—like nose to nose and eye to eye—and
very fiercely he said, “Love everyone and tell the truth.”
I started to say, “But …,” and at that point the whole rest of that
sentence became self-evident to me. He was saying, “When you
finish being who you think you are, this is who you will be.” I was
thinking I was somebody who couldn’t love everyone and tell the
truth. He was saying, “Well, when you give that one up, I am still
here, and the game is very simple. Love everyone and tell the
truth.”
I looked across at the group of Westerners—after all, this was
an order from my guru. I looked at this group of people I was so
angry with, and now I could see there was a place in them, I did
love.
Then he said, “Go take food.” I went over and started eating. I
was still crying.
He called everybody over to him and said, “Ram Days is a great
saint, go touch his feet.” That completely infuriated me.
Usually when you are angry with somebody, what you do is sit
down and talk it out until everybody saves face. You know how
that’s done: “I was wrong, I’m sorry.” “Well, that’s good of you to
say so …” The trouble was, he didn’t say I should save face. He
just said to love everyone and tell the truth. He was telling me to
give it up.
I saw that the only reason I got angry was because I was holding
on to how I thought it was supposed to be. So I cut some apples
into pieces, and I went around, and I looked each person in the eye.
I couldn’t feed them the piece of apple until I was free of the
anger, because to give food with anger is like giving somebody
poison. The vibration of anger gets transmitted along with the
food. It’s the opposite of healing. I looked each person in the eye,
and I saw everything I was angry at. And it began to dissolve. I
could feel that the only thing that was between us at this point was
my pride. I just didn’t want to give up my righteousness. But I saw
in each case that I had to just shed it—just let it go until I could
look into their eyes and just see my guru, see myself, see their
soul. I had to let go of our individual differences. It took quite a
long time because I had to give it up with each individual, and
some took longer than others.
After that kind of teaching you might think that I don’t get
angry anymore. I do. But when I start to get angry, I see my
predicament and how I’m getting caught in expectations and
righteousness. Learning to give up anger has been a continuous
process. When Maharajah told me to love everyone and tell the
truth, he also said, “Give up anger, and I’ll help you with it.”
Maharajah offered me a bargain: “You must polish the mirror free
of anger to see God. If you give up a little anger each day, I will
help you.” This seemed to be a deal that was more than fair. I
readily accepted. And he’s been true to his end of the bargain. I
found that his love helped to free me from my righteousness.
Ultimately I would rather be free and in love than be right.
If you feel a sense of social responsibility, first keep
working on yourself. Being peaceful yourself is the first step if you
want to live in a peaceful universe.
Have you ever noticed how many angry people there are at
peace rallies? Social action arouses righteousness. Righteousness
ultimately starves you to death. If you want to be free more than
you want to be right, you have to let go of righteousness, of being
right.
That reminds me of a story. There’s this Chinese boatman, and
he hits another boat in the fog. He starts swearing at the other
boatman. “You SOB! Why didn’t you look where you were going?”
Then the fog lifts for a moment, and he sees there is nobody in the
other boat. And he feels like a fool.
Righteousness is roughly the same thing. Say, for instance, you
hold a grudge against your father, and you talk to him in your mind
as if he’s there inside you. But he isn’t there. Psychologically you
think he is there, because you’re identified with who you think you
are, but once you begin to see this is all just a bunch of thoughts,
your psychological father is just another set of empty phenomena.
You are busy saying, “I forgive you, I forgive you,” to that
psychological father, but it’s like saying “I forgive you” to a clock.
There’s nothing there. You’re the same as the boatman.
There’s no rush. Go on being right just as long as you can.
You’ll see that being right is actually a tight little box that is very
constraining and not much fun to live in. Righteousness cuts you
off from the flow of things. When I’m locked in a situation in a
relationship with someone, it isn’t that they have done something
to me. They’re just doing what they’re doing. If I get caught up in
judging, the responsibility lies with me, not with them. It becomes
my work on myself. I often say, “I really apologize for whatever
suffering I’ve caused you in this situation.” We start to work from
there. And after a while they will come forward and will examine
themselves and say, “Well, maybe I was …” Our predicament is
that our ego wants to be right in a world of people who don’t
understand how right we are.
There is a way of representing what is right, the dharma of the
moment. But if you get emotionally attached to a model of how the
world ought to be that excludes how human beings are, there’s
something wrong with where you’re standing. You should be
standing somewhere else. Getting lost in your emotional reactivity
isn’t where you want to be. Just allowing your humanity and that of
others to be as it is, is the beginning of compassion.
We are in a human incarnation. We can’t walk away. To walk in
the dharma is also to hear other human beings.
FAITH, NO FEAR—NO FAITH, FEAR
As you tune into your own dharma, you become motivated to
confront the places in yourself that keep you trapped. When there
is fear, you aren’t free. President Franklin Roosevelt said, “The
only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”
Fear is a protective mechanism in the sense that you experience
free-floating anxiety about that which threatens you. Fear makes
you want to hold on to familiar structure in your life. If you are
busy identifying yourself as a separate entity, you fear the
extinction of that being. When you are identified with your soul,
there is no fear. The soul doesn’t identify with the ending of the
incarnation, which we think of as death.
Since meeting Maharajah, I do not experience a fear of death as
a real fear when I get into situations where death seems imminent.
I don’t have any of my earlier usual reactions of anxiety or fear,
and yet I protect the temple that is my body, because it is the
vehicle for my work. I don’t protect it out of fear, because the fear
of death seems somehow to have flown the coop somewhere along
the way. The absence of that fear changes the nature of my daily
experience. Now each day is just what it is.
When you experience fear, you are caught in your separateness,
feeling cut off and vulnerable. When you’re experiencing love,
you’re part of the unity of all things. Love is the antidote for fear
because it goes to the place behind separateness. As you cultivate
that unitive quality, the fear dissipates. As fear dissipates, you feel
at home in the universe. If you stay in the soul, you will stay in
love. It’s not a concept or a belief. When you have faith, there’s no
fear—only love. True “faith” arises when you know that you are
the soul, and that the soul is love.
Once, back in 1970, I was driving on the New York Thruway in
a 1938 Buick limousine that I had converted into a camper. I was
going very slowly because it was a very old car, driving with one
hand on the steering wheel and doing my male beads with the other
—just hanging out with various forms of the Divine. I was holding
the steering wheel with just enough consciousness to keep the car
on the road. I was singing to Krishna, a radiant, blue incarnation of
God who plays the flute. Krishna represents the seductive aspect of
the Beloved. I was ecstatically hanging out with blue Krishna and
driving along the New York Thruway when I noticed a blue,
flashing light in my rearview mirror. I thought, “Krishna has
come!”
There was enough of me focused on driving that I knew it was a
state trooper. I pulled over, and he came up to the car window. He
said, “May I see your license and registration?”
I was looking at him as Krishna, who had come to give me
darshan. It was 1970. Wouldn’t Krishna come as a state trooper?
Christ came as a carpenter.
Krishna asked for my license. I would have given him anything;
he could have my life, but all he wanted was my license and
registration. So I gave him my license and registration, and it was
like I was throwing flowers at the feet of God. I was looking at him
with absolute love.
He went back to his police car, and he called home base. Then
he came back, and he walked around the car, and he said, “What’s
in that box on the seat?”
I said, “They’re mints. Would you like one?”
He said, “Well, the problem is you were driving too slowly on
the thruway, and you’ll have to drive off the thruway if you’re
going to drive that slowly.”
I said, “Yes, absolutely.” I was just looking at him with such
love.
If you put yourself in the role of a state trooper, how often do
you suppose they get looked at with unconditional love, especially
when they’re in uniform? So after he had finished all the
deliberations, he didn’t want to leave, but he had run out of state
trooper-less. So he stood there a minute, and then he said, “Great
car you’ve got here!”
That allowed me to get out. And we could kick the tires and hit
the fenders and say, “They don’t make ’em now like they used to,”
and tell old car stories. Then we ran out of that. I could feel he still
didn’t want to leave. I mean, why would you want to leave if
you’re being unconditionally loved?
So finally he ran out of digressions. He knew he’d have to come
clean that he’s Krishna, so he said, “Be gone with you,” which
wasn’t state trooper talk, but what the hell. As I got into the car and
started to drive away, he was standing by his cruiser. I looked in
the mirror and saw that he was waving at me.
Tell me, was that a state trooper or was that Krishna?
SPIRITUAL FAMILY AND FRIENDS
As these spiritual practices start to work, your reasons for being
with people start to change, and who you want to be with changes
too. Sometimes it’s not easy, as longstanding relationships or jobs
are discarded. Your old friends might find you a little dull because
you’ve experienced a taste of a certain kind of truth—a deeper
truth connected to a different quality of being. Social interactions
that used to be engaging pale next to the attraction to the Beloved,
and social life begins to seem surreal. Not everyone can “hear” the
quality of the spiritual experience you are having. You are looking
for God, for whatever form of the Beloved touches your heart. You
are looking everywhere.
The poet-saint Air says:
Are you looking for me? I am in the next seat.
My shoulder is against yours.
You will not find me in steps, not in Indian shrine rooms,
nor in
synagogues, nor cathedrals:
not in masses, nor kittens, not in legs winding around your
own neck,
nor in eating nothing but vegetables.
When you really look for me, you will see me instantly—
You will find me in the tiniest house of time.
Air says, Student, tell me, what is God?
He is the breath inside the breath.
When you are first awakening and developing a spiritual
perspective, sat sang is especially supportive. Sat sang is like having
a spiritual family. Sat sang is a community of truth seekers. It is a
group of people with the shared awareness that there is a spiritual
dimension to the universe. Goethe had this beautiful thought: “The
world is so empty if one thinks only of mountains, rivers and
cities; but to know someone here and there who thinks and feels
with us, and who, though distant is close to us in spirit, this makes
the earth for us an inhabited garden.”
Once we get a taste of the freedom that comes with letting go of
our stuff—anger, righteousness, jealousy, our need to be in control,
the judging mind, to name just a few—we start to look at those
things in new ways. That is the teaching of being at the moment.
For someone who understands that this precious birth is an
opportunity to awaken, is an opportunity to know God, all life
becomes an instrument for getting there—marriage, family, job,
play, travel, all of it. You just spiritualize your life.
Christ said to be in the world but not of the world. You are
simultaneously living your story line—keeping your ground,
remembering your zip code—and having your awareness free and
spacious, not caught in anything, just delighting in the richness of
this timeless moment.
Chapter 4
Aging and Changing. The station was closed, so I had to buy my
IT WAS LATE EVENING
ticket on the train. I had just turned sixty. When the conductor
came by I said, “I’d like a senior ticket.” I felt like I had when I
was eighteen in New York and had gone to a bar with friends. With
trepidation, because I was under the drinking age, I said to the
bartender, “I’ll have a beer.” Now the conductor immediately made
out a ticket for a senior citizen. I said, “Don’t you want to see my
ID?” He said, “No, it’s OK.” I was shocked.
Until I was about fifty, I thought of myself as a teenager.
Around that time, I began to consider the possibility that I was an
adult. I was busy being spiritual, and I thought age was rather
uninteresting. After all, spiritual people are ageless, right?
Once I turned sixty, I decided I better see if there was any work
I needed to do around aging. In past years, I was usually traveling
on my birthday, so people couldn’t give parties for me. This year I
let friends know I wanted a birthday party because sixty is a big
year. I had several parties. I kept busy becoming sixty for about six
months.
One day I looked down at my hand, and I saw my father’s hand.
“That’s a sixty-year-old hand,” I thought. “With bones and blood
vessels, wrinkles, and spots.” I remembered this ad for Porcelain
hand cream, which said, “They call these aging spots. I call them
ugly.” Now, isn’t that an extraordinary way to create suffering?
Another way to look at it is just, “They call these aging spots.” And
here we are.
I began to feel like maybe it was time to close things out rather
than start new projects. Maybe I should write my last book or take
off for six months a year. As I traveled, I found the airport
corridors leading to the gates seemed to be getting longer. I was
steeping myself in what it was like to be getting older, to slow
down and honor the process.
At the same time I was savoring the feeling of aging, I began
behaving in a somewhat bizarre manner. I realized I was trying to
act younger, trying to accomplish things for which I was no longer
in physical shape. I went body surfing in the South Pacific with a
thirty-three-year-old friend. There I was, paddling in the waves of
Tahiti, surrounded by fifteen- to twenty-year-olds, out there having
fun. But I was struggling. I took a wrong turn and ended up getting
pounded by a wave against a coral reef and cutting my legs. The
young surfers looked at me with pity. I thought, “What the heck am
I doing?”
My father used to recite a verse that came back to me at that moment:
It’s not the crow’s feet under your eyes that make you old,
Or the gray in your hair, I’m told.
But when your mind makes a contract your body can’t fill,
You’re over the hill, brother, you’re over the hill.
Much of the suffering of aging comes from holding onto those
memories of who we used to be. When I was sixty-three and
writing a book on aging, I saw that I needed to be able to dance
through this part of my life’s curriculum without denial, without
closing down to the suffering, but just watching the way my
energies become less reliable, the way my patterns of life change.
For instance, I now have to live more economically. I watch how
society takes away my power as it makes me into a senior citizen.
But instead of struggling with every change of circumstance, it’s
just, “Ah, another new moment!”
CULTURAL ATTITUDES ON AGING
In the United States you might retire at fifty-five or sixty-five or
maybe later. Medicare for health care begins at sixty-five, but
other than starting to qualify for senior discounts, there’s no clear
rite of passage for becoming an elder or a senior, and you don’t
quite know what the cutoff is for being considered old.
Economic productivity and social roles cause so much stress in
our society—this modern hunting tribe. In traditional hunting
societies, the tribe has to keep moving, and when old people can’t
keep up, they tend to just be left behind. In terms of having a
function, they’re treated as irrelevant.
I am reminded of the story of an old Chinese man who retires.
He is too old even to help the family work in the garden. One day
the family is sitting on the porch, talking, and the old man’s son
thinks, “You know, he’s so old. He just eats food. What good is he?
Now it’s time for him to be done.” So he makes a wooden box, puts
the box on the wheelbarrow, and rolls the wheelbarrow up to the
porch and says, “Father, get in.” The father gets into the box. The
son puts the cover on the box and starts to wheel it toward the cliff.
As he gets to the edge of the cliff, there’s a knocking from inside
the box. The father says, “Son, I understand what you’re doing and
why you’re doing it, but may I suggest you just throw me over the
cliff and save the box. Your children will need it later.”
One thing that helped me avoid getting trapped in our Western,
youth-biased model was that I traveled a lot. I was always
surprised how different the feelings around aging were in other
cultures. While I was in India, I saw a dear old friend in a village
in the mountains. He said to me, “Ram Days, you’re looking so old.
You’re so gray!” My first reaction to that was my Western
conditioning, “What an insult! God, that’s terrible!” But when I
quieted down, I heard the tone in which he spoke. He was saying it
with great respect and affection. I had become a respected elder in
that society. He was saying, “You’ve earned the respect due an
elder. You’re someone whose wisdom we can rely on and to whom
we will listen.”
The Vedic philosophy of India has four principle stages of life,
or ashrams:
To age 20, you are a student.
From 20 to 40, you’re a householder, raising children and
earning money.
From 40 to 60, when your children are grown, they take over
your business, and you study philosophy, make pilgrimages, and
do spiritual practice.
From 60 on, you give up your responsibilities. You are free.
Society supports you because it needs the wisdom you have to
offer.
In cultures with extended-family structures, everybody has natural
roles, and old people are honored and respected. They remain part
of the family, and the old and young become wise fools together.
It’s all built into the system. But in our Western culture, we have
an aging problem.
Western technology moves so fast that we quickly become
outdated. The usefulness of our elders’ wisdom becomes
questionable. I tried to learn new computer programs, and I told
myself old dogs can learn new tricks. But I don’t know how many
new tricks I want to learn. Maybe I will just choose to be outdated.
Let’s at least recognize that we are living in a system that has
gotten out of balance. You and I are paying the price for having
grown up in a materially oriented society that values people in
terms of their products, their achievements, and their ability to
consume, instead of cultivating the quality of their being. The zeal
for independence and individuality has alienated us not only from
our deeper being, from family and community, but also from
nature.
Being out of touch with nature, as many of us are, we overlook
the cycles of cold and warm, of autumn leaves falling—the natural
cycles of birth, fruition, harvest, winter’s death, and the rebirth of
spring. The cycles of nature give an intuitive, innate meaning to
aging. And they give you a feeling of the appropriateness of time
and place. If our old people feel empty of purpose, perhaps it is
because our culture’s vision for the end of life is lacking too.
DEALING WITH CHANGE
An older man is walking down the street, and he hears a voice
saying, “Psst, could you help me out?”
He looks around, but he doesn’t see anybody.
Again he hears, “Psst, could you help me out?”
He looks down, and there is a big frog. He’s embarrassed—I
mean, you don’t talk to frogs. But he says, “Did you speak to me?”
And the frog says, “Yeah, could you help me out?”
“Well, what’s the problem?”
“I’m under a curse. If you pick me up and kiss me, I will turn
back into a beautiful maiden, and I will serve you and cook for you
and warm your bed, and I will be everything you ever wanted.”
The man stood there for a little while. Then he picked up the
frog, and he put it in his pocket and walked on.
After a while the frog said, “Hey, you forgot to kiss me.”
The man said, “You know, at my age I think it is more
interesting to have a talking frog.”
The nature of aging has to do with change. Old age trains you
for change—change in your body, change in memory, change in
your relationships, change in energy, change in your family and
social role—all leading to death, which is the big change in our
lives. You can see this last part of your life, the age stage, as a
diminution. On the other hand, from a spiritual standpoint, many of
these aspects are sensationally great. The clamor of the ego calms,
your motivations become clear, and wisdom begins to come forth.
Wisdom is one thing in life that does not diminish with age.
Wisdom is learning how to live in harmony with the world as it is
in any given moment. One aspect of that wisdom is the deep
understanding that we are all in the same boat. Out of that comes
compassion—compassion for yourself, compassion for others,
compassion for the world. Can you allow the changes and delight
in them and look for the wisdom inherent in each change rather
than resisting them?
Changing phenomena are endlessly wonderful and fascinating.
But when who we think we are begins to change, the fascination
turns into fear. Aging brings personal changes that are both
physical and psychological. It’s painful and confusing when the
body doesn’t do what it used to do, and starts to do a lot of things it
didn’t use to do.
Physical changes are endless, and if you’re identified with your
body, they can completely grab your consciousness. Whole Sunbelt
colonies in places like St. Petersburg, Florida, or Phoenix, Arizona,
are full of people sitting on benches reciting these changes to each
other. They call them “organ recitals.” You don’t ask, “How are
you?” unless you have the time to listen.
While you can hear how real that is for some people, just
imagine sitting on those same benches with people like Albert
Einstein, Pablo Picasso, Claude Monet, Marc Chagall, Bob Hope,
Grandma Moses, or Margaret Mead. Can you imagine them having
the same responses?
Part of how we deal with change depends on our perception.
Perceptually, each of us is two beings, an ego and a soul, that
function on different planes of consciousness. If we live
predominantly in our soul, then the changes in the body are
interesting, like changes in the weather.
Here’s a way to think of perception. Suppose you have a little
television receiver next to your eyes. Let’s pretend the various
planes of consciousness are channels on this television set. Most of
us, most of the time in this culture, act as if we have a one- or two-
channel set. We don’t have cable or satellite TV with hundreds of
channels. But maybe we’ve heard about cable, and we can at least
acknowledge the existence of these other channels floating around
in the room, even though we’re not picking them up. We can’t
receive them because we don’t know how to tune our receiver.
That’s basically what perception is about.
On channel one, when you look at another human being, you see
the physical body: old, young, dark, light, fat, thin, and so on.
Especially if you’re obsessed with your own physical body, that’s
what you see when you look at the world: other people’s physical
bodies. That’s the channel you’re seeing. Youth, sex, fitness,
fashion, beauty, sports—you know the programming.
Flip to channel two, and you’re in the psychosocial realm. You
see power, and you see happiness and sadness and neurosis. This is
the therapy channel and the social role channel. Here, we are
mothers and truck drivers and lawyers—all the different roles and
identities, intricacies of character and interaction, all the social
stuff. It’s As the World Turns, a fascinating, never-ending soap
opera that just goes on and on, episode after episode. Most people
are happy with channel two. Maybe 98 percent of the people you
meet are busy with these two channels all the time.
Now suppose you turn to yet another channel. This is the astral
channel. Here you’re seeing archetypes, the Jungian archetypes.
You’re dealing with what are called astral or mythic roles and
mythic identities. It’s the sort of place where you see people in
their mythos rather than in their personality structures. You’d look
at me, and you’d say, “He’s an Aries. I just knew it,” in the same
way you’d know someone’s a Sagittarius or a Leo. On this channel
there are only twelve of us in various permutations.
But if you flip to the next channel, you go behind all those
individual differences, and all you see is another soul, just like
you. All the packaging is different, but inside the wrapping each
one is another being just like you. That’s when you say, “Are you
in there? I’m in here. How’d you get in that one?” All the
personality stuff and the astral and mythic archetypes and the
physical form—all of it is packaging. Inside, you see the individual
spiritual entity.
Now, just for fun turn the channel once more. Here, you’re
looking at yourself looking at yourself—pure awareness looking at
itself. And there’s only one of it.
You try to live life in a way that is harmonious with what you
know on these other planes of consciousness. That harmony is part
of the wisdom that comes with age. Learning how to grow old is
the masterwork of wisdom and one of the most difficult chapters in
the great art of living.
One of the subtle traps of the ego, of the mind getting caught on
channel one or two, is your concept of time, because aging has to
do with time. But there is a part of you that is not in time, and
finding that place and resting in it is a key part of the mystical
journey. What you begin to see is that the spiritual journey is one
of going deeper and deeper into your being, going behind the part
of you that changes, to seek the part that does not change.
All the universe is but a sign to be read rightly…. War and
peace, love and separation are hidden gateways to other
worlds…. Let us not grow old still believing that truth is
what most people see around them.
FROM THE RAMAYANA, WILLIAM BUCK
AGING GRACEFULLY
Here’s the predicament: things change—my car gets old, my body
gets old. The external changes are obvious. The harder and subtler
task is to recognize that thoughts and feelings are also part of what
changes.
As you age, some of those thoughts and feelings in your life
will be traumatic because they counter the core model of who you
think you are. As long as you identify with your thoughts and
feelings, as long as you think those thoughts and feelings are you,
they will be a source of suffering.
As you face the changes associated with aging, you can get
trapped in a whole list of grim psychological possibilities: despair,
depression, feelings of worthlessness, frustration, doubt,
vulnerability, forgetfulness, irritability, loss of self-confidence,
fear of the future, obsession with possessions, lack of meaning,
loss of friends, fear of not having enough money, no one to touch,
loss of power or influence, lack of focus and goals, to name just a
few. Part of the psychological trap is your social support system,
which also changes as you retire from your life’s work. You may
have to leave your home. You have less responsibility. Reward
systems you worked so hard for don’t reward you anymore. You
may try to maintain psychological security by holding onto things
as they are. But you never know.
There is a story of a farmer who had a horse that ran away. His
neighbor came by and said, “Oh, that’s terrible.”
The farmer said, “You never know.”
The next day the horse came back, and it was leading two other
wild horses. The neighbor said, “That’s wonderful.”
And the farmer said, “You never know.”
Later, his son was training one of the wild horses, and while
riding the wild horse, he fell off and broke his leg. The neighbor
came by and said, “That’s terrible.”
The farmer said, “You never know.”
The Cossack army came through recruiting everybody, taking
away all the able young men. They didn’t take the farmer’s son
because he had a broken leg. The neighbor came by and said,
“That’s wonderful.”
And the farmer said, “You never know.”
And so it goes.
There is a spiritual model that will allow us to age gracefully
instead of the old psychological model that is fearful and
frightened. Martin Buber says, “To be old can be glorious if one
has not unlearned what it means to begin.”
Use the new uncertainty and negative feelings about aging as a
wake-up call. Have compassion for yourself and allow yourself to
open to the changes, and all the rest will follow.
In a Hallmark card, I found a poem about losing our mind.
Forgetting is great because it’s such fun to remember. But the
greatest psychological fear we have is of losing our mind. This
poem says:
Just a line to say I’m living, I’m not among the dead,
though I’m getting more forgetful and more mixed up in the
head.
Sometimes I can’t remember when I stand at the foot of the
stair
if I must go up for something or if I’ve just come down from
there.
And before the fridge so often my poor mind is full of doubt
have I just put food away or have I come to take some out.
And there
are times when it is dark out with my night cap on my head
I don’t know if I am retiring or just getting out of bed.
So if it is my turn to write you there is no need for getting
sore.
I may think that I’ve written and don’t want to be a bore.
Remember I do love you I wish you were here.
It’s nearly mail time, so I’ll say goodbye dear.
There I stood beside the mailbox with my face so very red.
Instead of mailing you my letter I have opened it instead.
I love my new bifocals, my dentures fit me fine,
my hearing aid is perfect, but Lord, I miss my mind.
It is easier to extricate oneself from the changes of aging when the
changes don’t involve one’s own personality. While you may be
able to see the body as object, it is very hard to see the personality
as object because you’ve identified with it for so long. You think
that’s who you are. Even though they keep changing, you keep
identifying with those thoughts and feelings.
Now we are getting more into the heart of the matter: can you
find a place to stand in relation to change where you are not
frightened by it? Can you live in the presence of change, even
enjoy the changes—work with the changes, become an elder, do all
the things that involve changing—and at the same moment
cultivate equanimity, clarity, loving awareness, compassion, and
joy? Balancing those qualities is really what the deep spiritual
work is about.
FREE TO BE
One of the reasons that old age is so disconcerting to many people
is that their roles change, and with those changes they experience a
loss of purpose; a diminished sense of value, identity, and self-worth; confusion about how to behave; a feeling of no longer being
needed. People are uncertain how to restructure their lives, how to
manifest as a being whose role is now totally unfamiliar to them.
Retirement and having children leave the parental nest are two role
changes that come to mind.
Recognize in yourself the conflicting forces; part of you wants
to stay effective in the world, and part of you wants to be
contemplative. Really give that contemplative part some space.
Water it a bit and give it some sunlight to grow instead of treating
it as an error. Give yourself the opportunity to grieve—for the end
of dreams, for the end of childhood, for all the people that go away,
for the sorrow of parting.
When you experience fear or are unsure about your situation,
there’s a beautiful and very powerful mantra you can say: “The
power of God is within me. The grace of God surrounds me.”
Repeat it to yourself or to a loved one in need. It will protect you.
Experience the power of it. It’s like a solid steel shaft that goes
through the top of your head right down to the base of your being.
Grace will surround you like a force field.
One of the gifts of old age is no longer caring so much about
what others think of us. Aging allows us to be more eccentric.
When we were younger, we were expected to behave in a certain
way. As we age, we can let it all fall apart a little more. We are
free to be ourselves—to follow our hunches, to experiment, or to
do nothing at all—as age liberates us from our old roles and offers
a different kind of freedom and an authentic way of being. Nadine
Strain was eighty-five when she wrote the poem “If I Had My Life
to Live Over”:
I’d like to make more mistakes next time. I’d relax. I would
limber up.
I would be sillier than I have been this trip. Furthermore, I would take
more chances.
I would climb more mountains and swim more rivers.
Furthermore, I would eat more ice cream and fewer beans.
Furthermore, I would perhaps have more actual troubles, but I’d have
fewer
imaginary ones.
You see, I’m one of those people who live sensibly and sanely
hour after hour, day after day.
Oh, I’ve had my moments, and if I had it to do over again,
I’d have more of them. In fact, I’d try to have nothing else.
Just moments, one after another, instead of living so many
years ahead
of each day.
I’ve been one of those persons who never goes anywhere
without a
thermometer, a hot water bottle, a raincoat, and a parachute.
If I had to do it again,
I would travel lighter than I have.
If I had my life to live over, I would start barefoot earlier in
the spring
and stay that way later in the fall.
I would go to more dances. I would ride more merry-go-rounds.
I would pick more daisies.
Don’t get caught in your old roles. If you cultivate the ways you
exist behind personality, the pure awareness of the witness, the “I
am loving awareness” place in your heart, you will begin to live
more in your soul. If you see the Beloved when you look at another
being, then everyone you see is a soul, as well as a mirror for your
own soul.
Relationships become so beautiful. Each person’s struggle, each
person’s journey, is so exquisite. Let yourself stop for a moment
and appreciate that beauty. It is so precious. Most people have no
idea they are beautiful. They’re busy being not beautiful, because
they think, “If only I had this or that, then I’d be beautiful.” But
who they are—their pain and their beauty—is all so beautiful.
The Beloved keeps appearing to you in one guise or another.
You can cultivate this view and practice your ability to see the
soul. Seeing the subtlety inside another person also depends on
your ability to acknowledge it in yourself. It takes One to know
One.
LETTING GO … AGAIN
Conscious aging has to do with letting go, which allows you to
come into the present moment—into spirit. Hold on tightly, let go
lightly.
Making believe you are done with something you are not truly
finished with will slow you down on your journey to God. Equally,
trying to hold onto something you are done with will slow your
journey.
How do you get on with it? You give up the things that don’t get
you to God. What do you give up? It’s not just material stuff. It’s
also the ways you identify yourself, how you feel about yourself.
For instance, give up your unworthiness. Don’t analyze it—just
give it up. Keep giving up your guilt, your anger, and your
preoccupation with your own melodrama. It’s just a melodrama, a
soap opera. Don’t you already know how it comes out?
You took this birth because you have work to do that involves
suffering and the kinds of situations you find yourself in. This is
your curriculum for this birth. Where you are now with all your
neuroses and problems is just the right place. This is it, and it’s
perfect. Live life fully and richly as a partner with God and accept
what comes with openness and love.
BEING WITH WHAT IS
Expand your perception of the world to include the horrible beauty
of decay. Look at decay and see how beautiful it is in its own way.
My dear friend Laura Huxley had a collection of beautiful
pharmaceutical jars in her kitchen over the sink. She’d take old
beet greens and orange peels and things and put them in water in
the jars and let them slowly mold and decay into beautiful
formations catching the light. It was decay as art. There is true
beauty in that.
There’s horror and beauty in everything. I look at my hand, and
it’s decaying. It’s beautiful and horrible at the same moment, and I
just live with it. See the beauty and perfection of decay in the
world around you and in yourself, and just allow it to be.
There are some unappreciated advantages to aging. The very
frailty of age guards its secrets. To many people you become
irrelevant, which gives you more time to do inner work. Francis, a
resident in a nursing home, wrote to me, “Lack of physical strength
keeps me inactive and often silent. They call me senile. Senility is
a convenient peg on which to hang nonconformity. A new set of
faculties seems to be coming into operation. I seem to be waking to
a larger world of wonderment—to catch little glimpses of the
immensity and diversity of creation. More than at any other time
of my life, I seem to be aware of the beauties of our spinning
planet and the sky above. Old age is sharpening my awareness.”
It is interesting to see how aging can work to one’s advantage
spiritually. I used to go to Burma to sit in meditation. I’d go into a
cell. I’d sit down—no books, no television, no computers, no one
to talk to. I’d just sit and go inward. Furthermore, I’d go into as quiet a place as I
could find. Just look at what happens when you get old. You lose
your hearing, you lose your sight, you can’t move around so well,
you slow down. What an ideal time to meditate. If any message is
clear, that’s it. Yet we treat aging as an error or a failing.
That distortion comes from defining ourselves in terms of doing
instead of being. But behind all the doing, all the roles, you just
are—pure awareness, pure consciousness, pure energy. When you
reside fully in the present moment, you are outside of time and
space.
Trunk Roche notes, “Our lives awaken through ordinary
magic.” It’s in everyday things that the miraculous happens. If we
practice being here now, we develop the sensitivity to perceive and
appreciate the daily miracles of our lives.
For a while I lived in an old school bus and spent a lot of time
in campgrounds with elderly neighbors. Earlier in their lives these
people had focused on planning for the future. Now that the future
was here, their consciousness was occupied with the past. I heard
heavy doses of sentimental reverie. As I was thinking about this, I
wondered, “Whatever happened to the present moment? What
happened to just making tea? What happened to this consciousness
of just being together in this beautiful place under the stars?”
Their minds were holding onto an identity that they were
constantly reinforcing by reliving the past. Any memory of a high
moment you’ve held on to keep you from this present moment.
And right here is the living spirit. If not here, then nowhere.
Now isn’t preparation for later. Here and now is it. There is a
spaciousness, an acceptance of what is at the moment, that says,
“Yes, ah so!” to everything, whether it’s ugly, beautiful, boring,
confused, dead, angry, the dark night of the soul, or the brilliant
light of the spirit. This is just the way it is. And in just the way it
is, is the spirit.
This moment is just enough. To come more and more fully into
the moment is to fully appreciate the infusion of the spirit. Once
you’ve tasted what it’s like to be in the spirit, to be with the
Beloved, you can’t stand to be away. Coming fully into the
moment is like coming through a doorway to another dimension of
consciousness—into being here now.
In Walden, Henry David Thoreau wrote:
Sometimes … I sat in my sunny doorway from sunrise till
noon, rapt in a reverie, amidst the pines and hickories and
sumac, in the undisturbed solitude and stillness, while the
birds sing around or flitted noiseless through the house, until
by the sun falling in at my west window, or the noise of
some traveler’s wagon on the distant highway, I was
reminded of the lapse of time. I grew in those seasons like
corn in the night, and they were far better than any work of
the hands would have been. They were not time subtracted
from my life, but so much over and above my usual
allowance. I realized what the Orientals mean by
contemplation and the forsaking of works.
In a letter, he also wrote, “To some extent, and at rare intervals,
even I am a yogi.”
Chapter 5
Conscious Living, Conscious
Dying
a chance to learn to use the shadows in our life as
AGING GIVES US
vehicles for our awakening—and the longest shadow of all is
death. How you relate to death is the key spiritual work of aging.
And how you see death is a function of how much you identify
with that which dies. Egos die. Souls don’t die. Rainer Maria Rilke
wrote:
But this: that one can contain
death, the whole of death,
even before life has begun,
can hold it to one’s heart
gently, and not refuse to go on living,
is inexpressible.
I encourage you to make peace with death, to see it as the
culminating event of this adventure called life. Death is not an
error; it is not a failure. My astral teacher, Emmanuel, says it is
like taking off a tight shoe. Confucius says, “Those that find the
Way in the morning can gladly die in the evening.”
For some of us, the subject of death is easy to talk about, and
for some of us, it’s a little threatening and frightening. I recognize
all that. But part of the essential spiritual work for us at any age is
to find a way to be with death.
An old tombstone inscription reads:
Dear friend,
Please know as you pass by
As you are now, so once was I.
As I am now so you will be.
Prepare yourself to follow me.
Take that epitaph as a blessing from beyond, and let us prepare
ourselves. I realize it’s presumptuous of me to talk about death, as
if I know about it, but I have chutzpah, which is Sanskrit for “a lot
of nerve.” In my meanderings through realms of consciousness
over the past fifty years, something happened to me that changed
my attitude toward death. A lot of the fear that surrounds death has
left me.
Partly that is from being with my guru and getting glimpses of
his perspective. He saw life and death from beyond the physical
body, as part of a long parade of births and deaths.
DEALING WITH FEAR
Not everyone is ready to talk with you about dying. We have to
honor all of our individual differences. Years ago my father was
about to have minor surgery, and the night before, I visited him in
the hospital. No operation is minor when you are eighty years old.
We had a nice visit. I had my jacket on, and I was halfway out the
door when Dad called me back.
“Just in case things go wrong, is there anything I should know?”
he asked.
I went back to his bedside and said, “All I can tell you is, as
good as this is, that is going to be better. And wherever you go, I’ll
be there.”
Dad said, “Great, that’s all I wanted to know. See you later.”
For many of us, the thought of death, thinking of when we or
someone we love is going to die, keeps us from being here now.
When will we die? How will we die? What will happen after we
die? What will happen to our loved ones? What about all the things
we hoped to accomplish? These deep fears and anxieties about our
survival keep us from living fully in the present moment.
Most of us are convinced that we are our egos, which is who we
think we are. The ego is part of our incarnation. It dies with the
body, which is why we are so afraid of death. Death scares the hell
out of who you think you are, especially if you think you are this
body. Being around death forces you to open to a deeper part of
yourself. The shadow, especially the shadow of death, is the
greatest teacher for how to come to the light.
That fear of death is an anticipatory fear. The only real
preparation for death is the moment-to-moment process of life.
When you live in the present moment, you are not living in the
future or in the past.
Don’t prolong the past,
Don’t invite the future,
Don’t alter your innate wakefulness,
Don’t fear appearances.
There’s nothing more than that!
PATROL ROCHE
When you are fully present at the moment, there is no anticipatory
fear, no anxiety, because you are just here and now, not in the
future. When we are resting in our souls, death is just closing a
chapter in a book.
DEALING WITH PAIN or the fear of pain is one of the major traps for our ego in the
process of dying. Although spiritual practices are a great help, pain
is a worthy adversary. What helps me the most is identifying with
the soul level of consciousness and staying centered in mantra. We
are not our bodies, but when our bodies experience pain, that is
often difficult to remember. That’s one reason it’s important to do
spiritual practice when we are healthy, so that we remain centered
in the spirit when we are not.
Physical pain or emotional pain is a thought as well as a
sensation. In working with pain, you witness these thoughts and
feelings and don’t identify with them. You are not your pain. The
pain is in your body and your mind. Try to be present in your soul.
It isn’t easy; Wavy Gravy sums it up well, “Pain sucks!” Truly
relieving the mental and emotional side of pain, your own or
anyone else’s, depends on maintaining your spiritual center,
witnessing from your spiritual heart, and not identifying with the
painful sensations, thoughts, and emotions. Pain is a fierce
motivator. From the spiritual standpoint, it’s one of those places
where the rubber meets the road.
In conventional Western medicine, people can now decide for
themselves, in collaboration with their doctor, how much pain
medication they need. It turns out that when people know that they
have control over their pain, they need a lot less medication,
because often pain is actually made worse by the fear of pain.
When working with pain, give it space, allow it to be, and know
that your awareness of the pain is separate from the pain itself.
Opening to the pain allows it to be part of the reality you are
witnessing and decreases the resistance to it, allowing you to relax
around it. Open to what it is, acknowledge it, give it space, bring
your awareness to it as another sensation. Pain is, and you are.
Poet and teacher Stephen Levine, in his book Guided
Meditations, Explorations and Healings, includes a meditation for
letting go of pain. He says:
Consider the possibility that the resistance to the pain and
the fear pain may evoke may be more painful than the pain
itself. Notice how the resistance closes your heart and fills
your body and mind with tension and dis-ease. Keep relaxing
the resistance … the tightness … that has accumulated
around the pain. “Soften” around the pain.
Ginny was a patient at the hospice where I was serving in
California. The first time I visited her she was skeptical and asked
what I had to teach her. She was dying of cancer of the nervous
system, and she was in extreme pain. She said she was bored with
dying. I invited her to try being here now, and we did a little
practice to bring her into the moment. Outside her open window we
could hear children playing. I suggested that she bring the sound of
the children inside of her. After a while, I suggested she
incorporate the ticking sound of the clock in the room inside of
her. She became very present. Coming fully into the moment and
into her soul took her out of time and space. This is important in
life and even more so when someone is dying. The soul is
independent of time and space.
Ginny and I became dear friends. There came a time when she
was so weak that all I could do was sit by her bedside. She was
literally writhing in pain, twisting her head and rubbing her hands
over her body. Her expression was one of very intense pain. I sat
next to her, doing the Buddhist meditation on the decaying body.
This is a formal meditation on the stages of decay of the human
body. I sat there, wide open, not closing my eyes or going off to
some other place, just staying with her, noticing the pain, noticing
the whole thing. I was letting my emotions flow but not holding on
or clinging to them or getting into judgment. I was just watching
the laws of the universe unfold, which is not easy to do around
death, especially with someone we love, because of our emotional
attachment.
As I sat there watching the pain and suffering, I started to
experience a great deep calm. The room became luminous. At that
moment, though her body was writhing with pain, Ginny turned to
me and whispered, “I feel so peaceful.” In this meditative
environment, she had been able to move beyond the pain and
experience deep peace. We had created a vibrational space that we
could be in together. Neither she nor I wanted to be in any other
place in the universe at that moment. A feeling of bliss permeated
the room. All I had done really was not to be freaked out that she
was dying or in pain.
WHAT DIES?
Each of us has our own work to do, our own unique karmic
predicament. But what’s most important is where you are doing it
from—that is, your point of view. Are you doing it from your ego,
your role, your personality—or from a place in you that doesn’t
change—your spiritual heart, your soul?
Are you stuck in time or not? Time is a river that flows from
birth to death, a lifetime. If you are in time, you will suffer and you
will die. If you change your identification from that which dies to
your soul, then you move into that realm of awareness that is
beyond time, though it includes time. Then you are a soul who is
part of the One. And souls don’t die.
Rilke said, “Love and death are magnificent gifts, which many
of us leave unopened.”
Making peace with your feelings about death is the prerequisite
for living life joyfully here and now. Death does not have to be
treated as an enemy for you to delight in life. Keeping death
present in your consciousness as one of the greatest mysteries, as
the moment of incredible transformation, imbues this moment with
added richness and energy.
The minute the fear of death has been faced, the meaning of life
changes. Otherwise, your fear distorts your perception all the time,
and you panic when someone gets near death. That panic is because
of your identification with those thoughts.
The journey of consciousness is about arriving at a balance in
life where you are open to the mystery of it all. You can’t be open
when you’re loaded down with a lot of conceptual stuff. In my own
consciousness, I watch how long it takes, when an expectation isn’t
fulfilled, before I come back again to being in the present moment.
How long before I can let go of not getting what I wanted, and just
be with what is?
As long as you identify with the part of you that dies, there is
always fear of death, because it is the fear of cessation of
existence. Through my experiences with psychedelic mushrooms
in the ’60s, I had the ineffable, profound experience of pure
consciousness beyond my body and knowing that this essence of
my awareness is beyond death. It was soon after that Aldous
Huxley gave The Tibetan Book of the Dead to Tim Leary and me.
Lamas read aloud from this book to their fellow monks when they
are dying and in the days following death. The book is centuries
old, yet described the same experiences I had with the mushrooms,
bringing me full circle to the universal nature of these experiences.
These issues of death, pain, and suffering bring us to the very
limit of our mind’s ability to deal with the mystery of life. Many
people rely on religion to reassure them about death. But religious
teachings are belief systems that are part of the mind structure, and
fear is inherent in a belief system, because when you die, your
mind dies and your beliefs die with it. A belief won’t keep you
warm on a cold night.
What may serve you is faith. Not faith in something outside—I
mean living in faith. It is faith in the sense that I live in absolute
wonder, in the presence of the great mystery.
In our Western culture, although death has come out of the
closet, it is still not openly experienced or discussed. Living in
India, I found the differences in our outlook on death and theirs to
be enormous. In India, death is a familiar part of life. Allowing
dying to be so intensely present enriches both the preciousness of
each moment and our detachment from it.
In India, it is not unusual to see a body being carried down the
street on the way to the burning ghat to be cremated. The body
leaves with the head facing back to its physical home. Halfway to
the burning ghat, the body is turned around, so the head is facing
the opposite direction, toward the burning ghat, to symbolize the
transition to the spiritual home. The whole way, people in the
procession are chanting, “RAM Nam Satya HAI, Satya Box,
Satya HAI,” which means, “RAM’s [God’s] name is Truth.”
One day Maharajah was walking with a devotee of many years
when he suddenly looked up and said, “Ma just died.” She was an
old woman and a great devotee. Since she lived in a distant city, it
was obvious he had seen her death on another plane. Then he
laughed and laughed. His devotee was shocked and called Sahara-
I a “butcher” to laugh at the death of such a beautiful and pure
woman. Maharajah turned and said, “What do you want me to do,
act like one of the puppets?”
Maharajah often spoke about death to his devotees, and his
perceptions had a major effect on my attitude about dying. Some of
the things he said were, “The body passes away. Everything is
impermanent except the love of God,” and, “The body dies, but not
the soul.” He also said, “This world is all attachment. Yet you get
worried because you are attached.”
When the great South Indian saint Ramona Maharishi was dying
of cancer, his doctors wanted to treat him, but he refused, saying,
“This body is all used up.” His devotees, who loved him dearly,
cried, “Bhagavan [Blessed One], don’t leave us, don’t leave us.”
He replied, “Don’t be silly, where can I go?”
The biblical idea of dying and the soul being born again into
truth or wisdom or spirit is what our business with death is really
about. As the Bhagavad Gita says, “We are born into the world of
nature; our second birth is into the world of spirit.”
As you extricate yourself from a rigid identification with body,
personality, and mind, you begin to be spacious enough to allow
death to be part of the process of life rather than the end of
existence. I feel this very deeply.
People ask me if I believe there is continuity after death. I say
that I don’t believe it—it just is. This offends my scientific friends
no end. But belief is something you hold with your intellect, and
for me this goes way beyond my intellect. The Bhagavad Gita also
tells us, “As the Spirit of our mortal body wanders on in childhood
and youth and old age, the Spirit wanders on to a new body: of this
the sage has no doubts.” As Krishna says, “Because we all have
been for all time … And we all shall be for all time, we all for ever
and ever.”
In a Buddhist country in an ancient time, an army was going
through villages and killing many people. They were
disemboweling the monks to get rid of Buddhism, which happened
a lot in the times of Genghis Khan. There was one particularly
harsh commander who had a reputation for being very cruel. He
came into this town, and he said to his adjutant, “What’s happening
in the town?”
The adjutant said, “All the people are bowing down to you.
They are all afraid of you. All the monks in the monastery have
fled to the mountains except for one monk.”
The commander was furious that a monk was still there. He
walked into the monastery and pushed open the gates, and there in
the middle of the courtyard was the monk just standing there. The
captain walked up to him and said, “Don’t you know who I am? I
could take my sword and run it through your belly without blinking
an eye.”
“And don’t you know who I am?” said the monk, “I could have
your sword run through my belly without blinking an eye.”
The commander bowed and left.
When you get into the spiritual literature, you start to see a
lightness about death. A Zen master was dying. Zen masters are
supposed to leave a death verse, and he hadn’t written his yet. His
students were very concerned that he would die before writing his
verse. They kept saying, “What about your verse? What about your
verse?” So he picked up his calligraphy brush and wrote, “Earth is
thus, death is thus. Verse or no verse, what’s the fuss?” And then
he died.
In his foreword to a 1960 edition of The Tibetan Book of the
Dead, Lama Angara Dorinda wrote:
It may be argued that nobody can talk about death with
authority who has not died; and since nobody, apparently,
has ever returned from death, how does anybody know what
death is, or what happens after it?
The Tibetan will answer: “There is not one person,
indeed, not one living being, that has not returned from
death. In fact, we have all died many deaths before we came
into this incarnation. And what we call birth is merely the
reverse side of death,” like one of the two sides of a coin, or
like a door which we call “entrance” from outside and “exit”
from inside a room.
It’s much more astonishing that not everybody
remembers his or her previous death; and, because of this
lack of remembering, most persons do not believe there was
a previous death. But, likewise, they do not remember their
birth—and yet they do not doubt that they were recently
born.
BEING WITH SOMEONE DYING
I sit with people who are dying. I’m one of those unusual types that
enjoys being with someone when they’re dying because I know I
am going to be in the presence of Truth. I was with my mother and
later my stepmother when they were dying. I am deeply grateful
for those experiences.
My mother was dying in early February 1966, in a hospital in
Boston.
I was sitting at her bedside. By then I had been working on
understanding my own consciousness for some years. She was sort
of resting. I was in kind of meditative mode, just being spacious
and aware and noticing what was happening as the relatives and
doctors and nurses came into the hospital room and said,
“Gertrude, how are you doing?” I listened to the cheery tone of the
nurse. I realized that my mother was surrounded by a conspiracy of
denial. I watched people coming into the room, all the relatives and
doctors and nurses saying she was looking better, that she was
doing well, and then they would go out of the room and say she
wouldn’t live out the week. I thought how bizarre it was that a
human being going through one of the most profound transitions in
her life was completely surrounded by deception. Can you hear the
pain of that? One woman came in and said, “The doctor just told
me there’s a new medication that we think will help.”
Nobody could be straight with her because everybody was too
frightened—all of them, everybody, even the rabbi. Mother and I
talked about it. At one point, when nobody else was in the room,
she turned to me and said, “Rich?” I’d just been sitting there—no
judgment, no nothing, just sitting—and we just met in that space.
She said, “Rich, I think I’m going to die.”
I said, “Yeah, I think so too.”
Imagine what that must have been for her to just have
somebody affirm what she knew. She couldn’t get anybody in the
entire constellation of her friends, relatives, doctors, and nurses to
validate it for her.
She said, “What do you think it’s going to be like, Rich?”
I said, “Well, of course, I don’t know. But I look at you, and I
can see your body disintegrating. It’s like a house burning. But you
are still there, and I figure when the building burns, it will go, and
you’ll still be there. It seems to me the way you and I are
connected isn’t really defined by this body that is disintegrating,
because you sound just like you’ve always sounded. I feel like I’ve
always felt. Yet this body is decaying before us.
“I think the way that you and I love each other, I just believe
that love transcends death.” That was a very touching connection
for us.
Later I was with my stepmother, Phyllis, when she was dying of
cancer. Phyllis was sixty-nine, and my father was eighteen years
older. When they got married, I gave away the bride. We were
good buddies. Now she was dying, and my role was to be with her
and help her through the process.
She and I had been to the doctors together, and we had done the
whole thing of getting all the reports and dealing with all the
emotions. Phyllis was a very tough New England lady, a
wonderful, grounded, poker-playing woman. She was
argumentative and willful, just fun.
She had a stiff-upper-lip way of living life, and she was
approaching her death the same way. My job wasn’t to say, “Hey,
Phyllis, you should open to this.” That wasn’t my moral right. My
job was just to be there with her. So I would lie on the bed, and we
would hold each other, and we would just talk. We would talk
about death and what we thought it might be like and all, but she
was still being very strong.
The pain of the cancer was intense, and over time it finally wore
away her will. A moment came, maybe four or five days before her
death, when she gave up.
In our culture giving up is seen as a failure. Everybody says to
keep trying, keep trying. The result is we sometimes surround
dying people with a kind of false hope that comes out of our own
fear.
With Phyllis, I was just open, and she could ask whatever she
wanted. I didn’t say, “Now let me instruct you about dying,”
because she wouldn’t have accepted that. But then she gave up. At
the moment she surrendered, it was like watching an egg hatch. A
new being emerged that was so radiantly beautiful and present and
light and joyful. It was a being that at some deep intuitive level she
knew herself to be but never had time for in her adult life. She
opened to this being, and together we just basked in its radiance. At
that moment she had gone into another plane of consciousness. We
were together talking, but the pain and the dying process had just
become phenomena. She was no longer busy dying; she was just
being, and dying was happening.
Just to complete this story, to tell you how extraordinary this
transformation was, right at the last moment she said, “Richard,
please sit me up.” So I sat her up. I put her legs over the bed, and
her body was falling forward. So I put my hand on her chest, and
her body fell back. So I put my other hand on her back, and her
head was lolling. So I put my head against her head. We were just
sitting there together. She took three breaths—slow, deep breaths
—and she left.
If you read the ancient Tibetan texts, you read that when
conscious lamas leave their body, they sit up, they take three
breaths, and they leave. Who was Phyllis? How did she know that?
What was that about? These are the mysteries that we live with.
My dear friend Deborah was dying at Mount Sinai Hospital in
New York. She was a member of the New York Zen Center, and
every evening her friends from the center came to her hospital
room to meditate. Doctors entering this hospital room were
surprised to find it lit by candles and filled with the fragrance of
incense and the deep peace of people in meditation. In this busy
big-city hospital, this group of people meditating had redefined the
metaphor for dying. You can create your universe anywhere you
are. A hospital is merely a collective of beings who share a certain
model about what it’s all about. Each night her doctors entered the
room more gently.
Curing a disease of the body is not always an option, but healing
from the soul level is always possible. In working with those who
are dying, I offer another human being a spacious environment
with my mind in which they can die as they need to die. I have no
right to define how another person should die. I’m just there to
help them transition, however they need to do it. My role is just to
be a loving rock at the bedside.
When Wavy Gravy, the clown prince of the Hog Farm
commune, talks to children about dying, he tells them to shed their
body like taking off a suit of old clothes and to go for the light that
will take you to God, your friend.
Working with the dying is like being a midwife for this great
rite of passage of death. Just as a midwife helps a being taken their
first breath, you help a being taken their last breath. To be there
fully requires being deeply grounded in compassion and love.
Compassion, in this instance, is just both of you becoming who you
are together—like the right hand taking care of the left hand.
I n Guided Meditations, Explorations and Healings, Stephen
Levine says:
Death is an illusion we all seem to buy into…. But death,
like anything that catches the heart’s attention, can bring out
the best in us. We have seen many people as they approach
even the confusion around death, go beyond that dismay and
become one with the process…. They deepen the work they
perhaps took birth to complete. They are no longer someone
separate, someone “dying consciously.” They are merely
space within space, light within light.
See in the dying person only that which is eternal. Then you will be
able to communicate as souls.
When you are with someone who is dying, be there with them.
All you have to give is your own being. Be honest. Meditate and
become aware that the pain or confusion is, and here we are, in
quiet equanimity. We all have limits of tolerance. Stay as clear and
conscious as possible as someone nears death. Open to the
unexpected. Open and stay centered. If you remain centered, your
calm presence helps to free all those around you. Go inside
yourself to that quiet place where you are wisdom. Wisdom has in
its compassion. Compassion understands about life and death. The
answer to dying is to be present at the moment. To learn to die is to
learn how to live. And the way you do that is by living each
moment—this one, now this one—just being here now.
The moment when the soul leaves the body is palpable and
deeply profound. To share consciousness with a person who is
dying, to be with them and help them die consciously, is one of the
most exquisite manifestations of service. It is one role you may
want to try out.
CONSCIOUS DYING
My view has evolved to seeing death—the moment of death—as a
ceremony. If people are sitting with you to help as you are going
through this dying ceremony, help them to see you as the soul you
truly are, not as your ego. If they identify you as your ego, during
the last part of this ceremony they will cling to you and pull you
back instead of facilitating your transformation.
Sahara, either a specific practice or your overall spiritual
transformation, begins with you as an ego and evolves into your
being a soul, who you really are. The ego is identified with the
incarnation, which stops at the moment of death. The soul, on the
other hand, has experienced many deaths. If you’ve done your
Sahara fully, there will be no fear of death, and dying is just
another moment.
If you are to die consciously, there’s no time like the present to
prepare. Here is a brief checklist of some of the ways to approach
your own death:
Live your life consciously and fully. Learn to identify with and
be present in your soul, not your ego.
Fill your heart with love. Turn your mind toward God, guru,
Truth.
Continue with all of your spiritual practices: meditation, mantra,
Kiran, all forms of devotion.
Be there for the death of your parents, loved ones, or beloved
animals. Know that the presence of your loved ones will remain
when you are quiet and bring them into your consciousness.
Read about the deaths of great saints, lamas, and yogis like
Ramona Maharishi.
If there is pain at the time of death, try to remain as conscious as
possible. Medication for pain offers some solace but dulls your
awareness.
To be peaceful at the time of your death, seek peace inside
today. Death is another moment. If you’re not peaceful today,
you probably won’t be peaceful tomorrow.
Sudden death is, in many ways, more difficult to work with
spiritually than a gradual passing. If we are aware that death can
happen at any moment, we start to work on ourselves more
constantly, paying attention to the moment-to-moment content of
our minds. If you practice being here now, being fully at the moment during your life, if you are living in that space, then the
moment of death is just another moment. Let me tell you a story
about living like this.
A monk is being chased by a tiger. He runs as fast as he can, but
the tiger is hot on his heels. Ahead of him is a cliff, with a vine
hanging down over the edge. He grasps the vine and begins to
clamber down the face of the mountain, when down below, he
spots another tiger prowling on a ledge beneath him. A tiger above
and a tiger below, he hangs there, clinging to the vine. Then he
notices that two little mice have scampered up and begun gnawing
at the vine that is supporting him. At that desperate moment, he
sees right before him a ripe, red, wild strawberry, growing on the
side of the mountain. He plucks and eats it—how sweet it tastes!
In Tibet, when they give instructions at the end of life, they say,
“As the earth element leaves, your body will feel heavy. As the
water element leaves, you will feel dryness. As the fire element
leaves, you may feel cold. As the air element leaves, your out-breath will be longer than your in-breath. The signs are now here.
Don’t get lost in the details. Let your awareness go free.” Imagine
that, instead of, “Oh I’m thirsty,” or “She’s thirsty. Give her
water,” an acknowledgment of, “Ah, the water element.”
A feeling of expansion as you go into death—that’s just one
metaphor. Our concept of going from one plane to another is like
climbing rungs on a ladder, or as we said earlier, tuning to another
channel on the TV. You have to let go when you leave the physical
plane. When I was guiding psychedelic trips, people would bad-trip
because they couldn’t let go as their consciousness expanded, and
they faced eternity. You have to let go of your individuality, your
name, your history, your friends, your cat, your body. That letting
go is meeting the infinite.
Empty your mind of all thoughts.
Let your heart be at peace….
Each separate being in the universe
returns to the common source.
Returning to the source is serenity.
If you don’t realize the source,
you stumble in confusion and sorrow.
When you realize where you come from,
you naturally become tolerant,
disinterested, amused,
kindhearted as a grandmother,
dignified as a king.
Immersed in the wonder of the Tao,
you can deal with whatever life brings you,
and when death comes, you are ready.
BAOTOU, TRANSLATED BY STEPHEN MITCHELL
Whatever you need to do to get ready to die, you should have done
it a minute ago. Do it now and get ready. Every moment is the
moment you die. Every breath is the first and last. A conscious
being holds on nowhere.
GRIEVING
I often work with family members who have lost someone and are
grieving. They are grieving for their connection to the place in
themselves where they feel safe in the universe and at home, loved,
and at peace. When someone close dies, that feeling of safety and
security is overturned. I encourage people to stay with what they
are feeling—with their grief.
Our Western culture says, “It’s good that you’re over it. Now
you can start living life again.” But our attachments to our loved
ones are very deep, and grieving has to run its course. Just allow
that pain of being human. The passage of time is healing. During
this healing phase, surround and insulate yourself with love.
You will grieve and go through all the emotional responses.
Then there will come a moment when all of a sudden, you awaken
to the fact that the love that you shared with that person is still
here. Maybe you will be watching a sunset or just sitting quietly.
At that moment you will begin to let go of that person as a separate
entity, and allow them to merge into your soul … in love.
When you and another person enter into love together, you enter
into a unitive moment that transcends death. Recognize that you
feel enriched by everybody you have loved, instead of deprived by
the loss of their form. You’ll realize they continue to live in your
heart. Everybody you have ever loved is part of the fabric of your
being. And that is where grief gets transformed into a living,
loving space, a spiritual transcendence of the pain.
Love transcends death. Still, to be that wisdom is different from
knowing about it. Death is only a moment, a moment of transition.
If you know yourself to be your soul, you’ve gone through many,
many deaths of your own—through many different incarnations.
Those whom you are grieving for are also souls passing through
deaths, births, deaths, births.
If you identify with your own soul, you will be able to
communicate with other souls, even though they are on a different
plane. I still communicate with my guru, although he died in 1973.
After he died, he was everywhere.
Eleven-year-old Rachael and her girlfriend went to a
neighborhood Jewish community center to play tennis, and Rachael
was raped and murdered. I received a call that night from a friend
who told me the parents had read my books and listened to my
tapes.
Was there something I could say to them at this moment? I
realized I couldn’t do it tomorrow. It had to be done right now
because the enormity of that pain was so great. So I wrote this
letter to them that I would like to share with you:
Dear Steve and Anita,
Rachael finished her work on Earth and left the stage in a
manner that leaves those of us left behind with a cry of
agony in our hearts as the fragile thread of our faith is dealt
with so violently. Is anyone strong enough to stay conscious
through such teachings as you are receiving? Very few, and
even they would have only the briefest whisper of
equanimity and peace amidst the screaming trumpets of their
rage, grief, horror, and desolation.
I can’t assuage your pain with any words, nor should I, for
your pain is part of Rachael’s legacy to you. Not that she or I
would inflict such pain by choice, but there it is. And it must
burn its purifying way to completion. For something in you
dies when you bear the unbearable, and it is only in that dark
night of the soul that you are prepared to see as God sees and
to love as God loves.
Now is the time to let your grief find expression. No false
strength. Now is the time to sit quietly and speak to Rachael
and thank her for being with you these few years and
encourage her to go on with her work, knowing that you will
grow in compassion and wisdom from this experience.
In my heart I know that you and she will meet again and
again and recognize the many ways in which you have
known each other. And when you meet, you will, in a flash,
know what now is not given to you to know and why this had
to be the way it was. Our rational minds can never
understand what has happened, but our hearts, if we can keep
them open to God, will find their own intuitive way.
Rachael came through you to do her work on earth, which
included her manner of death. Now her soul is free, and the
love that you can share with her is invulnerable to the winds
of changing time.
Love,
Ram Days
DEATH IS A REMINDER TO LIVE LIFE FULLY
In Eastern traditions, the state of consciousness at the last moment
of life is considered so crucial that you spend your whole life
preparing for it. Mahatma Gandhi, the great Indian leader, walked
into a garden to give a press conference and was assassinated. As
he fell, all he said was “RAM!” the name of God.
Meter Baba proclaimed, “The divine Beloved is always with
you, in you, and around you. Know that you are not separate from
Him.”
I am without form, without limit
Beyond space, beyond time
I am in everything, everything is in me,
I am the bliss of the Universe
Everything Am I
SWAMI RAM BIRTH
Aldous Huxley says so beautifully on his novel island, “So now you
can let go, my darling…. Let go…. Let go of this poor old body.
You don’t need it anymore. Let it fall away from you. Leave it
lying there like a pile of worn-out clothes…. Go on, my darling, go
on into the Light, into the peace, into the living peace of the Clear
Light.”
Making peace with death and being fully at the moment allows
you to lose yourself in love—in the love of the beauty and awe of
God made manifest, in loving yourself and everything else, the
suffering, the pain, the joy. In the eternal present of the moment
you are free of time. Then if death is the moment, that’s the
moment. When you are in that place of openness, it’s all possible.
At the moment of death, you are surrendering and being cradled in
the arms of God. If we let go lightly, we go out into the Light,
toward the One, toward God. What grace!
One dies as one lives. What else can better prepare you to die
than the way you live? The game is to be where you are—honestly,
consciously, and as fully as you know how. Once you have
awakened, you can’t fully go back to sleep. Regardless of what
happens in the world, I’m still going to follow Maharajah’s
instructions every day—to love everyone, serve everyone, and
remember God—love, serve, remember.
There comes a point where you really want to clean up your act.
You start to look for the fire of purification. That’s when it gets
very interesting, because suddenly you’re looking for those
situations that push your buttons. You take a deeper look at the
roles you play in your incarnation—your responsibilities to
parents, children, country, religion, friends, yourself—and work on
bringing them into harmony with your deeper being.
Part of your relationship with yourself is taking responsibility
for the care of your body and doing the things that promote good
health. The body is the temple of the soul, the temple of your
spirit. It is the vehicle for you to stay in this incarnation and
become a fully conscious being—the vehicle for you to become
one with God. Honor it. Take care of it. I was not fully conscious in
the way I dealt with my body, and I paid a big price with the stroke
that I had.
As you quiet your mind, you begin to see the different
components of your being and which ones are out of harmony. For
example, at times you can feel that your body is pulling on you.
It’s draining your energy, or the muscles need strengthening or
relaxing. Remembering that your body is the temple of your spirit,
work with it, doing things that release or balance energy. Hath
yoga, the yoga of energy, can be used as a path to the soul.
Forming an Asana is talking to God. Also be mindful of what you
put into your body. The human body is a manifestation of God.
Honor it.
Much of spiritual work is slowing down enough to let our minds
come into harmony with our hearts. In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna
tells Arjuna, “Give Me your mind and your heart, and you will
come to Me.” It is as if he is saying, “Always think of me, always
love me, and I will guide your heart and your actions.” If, as I do,
you follow the path of guru Krita, the grace of the guru, the same
applies. Let your love and devotion guide the heart. Let the
thinking mind be balanced by the Shakti heart.
Being here now is experiential. When you are at the moment,
time slows down. At this moment you have all the time in the
world. But don’t waste a moment. Who you really are is beyond
time. When Christ says, “Look, I am making all things new,” it’s
the same as when you’re living in the here and now, and you start
fresh in every new moment. When you are really at this moment,
this is all there is. And the moment of death is just another
moment.
Chapter 6
From Suffering to Grace
when each of us has to bear the unbearable. It
THERE IS TIMES
may come as physical pain, illness, or emotional suffering from our
own, of someone dear to us, or of other sentient beings.
Can you respond to suffering without closing down and still
keep your heart open? It seems almost instinctive to use your mind
to protect your heart, to rationalize the suffering to avoid the pain
or discomfort. But then you cut yourself off from true compassion
for yourself and others.
Most of us armor our hearts when dealing with the immensity
of the suffering that exists in the world. We look at all the people
who are starving when we have just finished a big breakfast, and
we turn away. We feel like there is nothing we can do, and we can’t
bear to see the suffering. Armoring the heart is the opposite of
opening the heart. You know the feeling of loving another person;
you know how that love feeds you. Love is how we feed each other,
but when you experience overwhelming suffering, you close your
heart defensively. Your heart may feel protected and less
vulnerable, but it is also deadened in the process. Armoring the
heart cuts off the living spiritual interchange of energy that exists
in the universe and that nourishes the spirit in all of us.
We all fear suffering. People find the world scary because they
become overwhelmed by the surrounding suffering, their own and
everybody else’s. In any major city in the United States, there are
homeless people sleeping in doorways. It’s one thing to experience
this in India; in Calcutta it seems like half the population lives on
the street. But in the affluent United States, it’s bizarre that some
people live so well and some are so poor. It feels like we should be
able to get it together enough to provide everybody with at least
shelter, food, and clothing. Are we turning away because our minds
are closing off our hearts to the suffering of others?
I deal with the immensity of the suffering all around me by
cultivating more than one plane of consciousness, by witnessing,
and by acknowledging the laws of the universe. When I can arrive
at a perceptual vantage point where I look at a leaf or a drop of
water or stars and planets and see the oneness of existence, I can
begin to see the exquisite interrelationship of phenomena. I can
find universal law in each field I examine—physics, astronomy,
music, genetics, mathematics, chemistry. From that point of view
of oneness, I can’t help being filled with awe at the magnificence
of how it all works. I also realize that suffering is part of the way it
all works.
WHY IS THERE SUFFERING?
After the Buddha’s enlightenment under the Bodhi tree, he
expounded to his new disciples what came to be known as the Four
Noble Truths. The first Noble Truth says that all existence is
characterized by suffering. Birth has in it suffering, death has in it
suffering, old age has in it suffering, and sickness has in it
suffering. Not getting what you want has in it suffering; getting
what you don’t want has in it suffering. Even getting what you do
want or not getting what you don’t want involves suffering,
because both are in time.
Anything in time is impermanent. Jesus said, “Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth
corrupt.” As long as you are caught up in time, there is suffering.
The second and third Noble Truths deal with the causes of
suffering, which are the clinging of mind—to attractions and
aversions—and to a false sense of self. The fourth Noble Truth lays
out the Eightfold Path to get free of suffering.
THE WAY OF GRACE
I deeply honor the Buddha, and I have studied Buddhism a lot and
practiced much Buddhist meditation. But my particular spiritual
path is through my guru, Maharajah. The guru reflects our deepest
Self. Indeed, when fully known, the guru is our deepest Self, and
that is who we see when we polish the mirror of our being.
My relationship with Maharajah is one of faith. That faith
allows me to see everything that comes my way as his grace. Just
remembering that everything is his grace, is itself grace, but
sometimes it doesn’t come easy.
On February 19, 1997, I suffered a severe hemorrhagic stroke (a
bleed rather than a blockage). I had been working on a book about
aging, and I was lying in bed trying to imagine what it would be
like to be old and sick and suffering, when I had a massive stroke.
The phone rang. I tried to get out of bed to answer it, and I fell
onto the floor. I was paralyzed on one side. Furthermore, I managed to reach the
phone and pick up the receiver, but I was unable to speak. My
friend calling from New Mexico realized something was wrong,
and asked me to tap on the phone if I needed help, which I did.
Within a few minutes, my secretaries, Marlene and Joanne,
appeared, soon followed by paramedics. I remember being wheeled
into the hospital on a gurney. During those first few days, no one
knew if I would survive. The news of my stroke traveled fast—
even to India. Prayer circles around the country were sending me
healing energy. The people surrounding me, the doctors and nurses,
my friends and relatives—all wore long faces. They kept saying,
“Oh, you poor guy, you’ve had a stroke!”
As I absorbed their mindsets, I started to think I was a poor guy,
just another stroke victim. They were projecting the full view of a
stroke as a medical disaster onto me. It was coming from almost
everybody—except the cleaning woman. Whenever she came into
my room, she was totally present with me. She knew.
Before my stroke, I felt like I led a life of grace because I was
under the protective umbrella of my guru. The stroke shattered my
faith in that protection. I felt I had fallen out of grace. I lost faith
and I got very depressed for a while.
I would look at the picture of my guru on the hospital wall and
say, “Where were you when I had this stroke? Were you out to
lunch?” For the first two months, I was almost totally dependent
and suffering—physically, psychologically, and spiritually. I sat in
my hospital bed attempting to make sense of what had happened.
On one hand, there was the stroke; on the other hand, there was
Maharajah’s grace. How did this stroke fit in with his grace?
Slowly things began to shift. I started thinking about the stroke
in different ways. Could this stroke be grace in any way? Awful
grace? It certainly wasn’t helping my ego, but could it possibly
benefit my soul? The effects of the stroke included aphasia,
paralysis, and dependence on others. Attempting to reperceive it, I
tried to find out where the grace might be hidden. After all, this
was still Maharajah’s play, his Lila. I was trying to figure out
Maharajah’s grace in the stroke, how this sickness was going to
help get me to God.
Early on I was markedly aphasic, unable to speak at all.
Learning to speak again was hard. Words came slowly. I had to
learn to deal with silence—a great boon spiritually because it
forced my mind to be quiet. I had to go beyond my intellect into
the silence of my intuitive heart. As I became more absorbed in the
heart, I found it to be a place where separation disappears and
knowledge gives way to wisdom. About a year and a half after my
stroke, I started speaking again publicly. It’s good motivation for
your speech therapy to have five hundred people waiting for you to
get your words out.
When I would lecture before the stroke, there would always be
one or two people in the audience who had been dragged to hear
me speak by a spouse or a friend. It was easy to pick them out of
the crowd; they’d be sitting with their arms folded and their faces
wearing a long-suffering look. I’d work hard to help them open
their hearts. Now my wheelchair opened their hearts. And because
of the wheelchair, I was always assured of having a seat wherever I
went.
The stroke taught me about dependency. I went from being the
driver of a sports car to a passenger. I was in a body that now
needed help from others. As a passenger I could appreciate the
passing trees and clouds in a way I couldn’t when I had to pay
attention to traffic.
I had written a book called How Can I Help? (with Paul
Gorman); now I needed to write one called, How Can You Help
Me? Since the stroke, I have been deeply humbled by the
compassion of other beings. I am blessed to have such wonderful
people taking care of me. Now they take care of my body, and
together we take care of each other’s souls.
CHANGING YOUR POINT OF VIEW
As I see it, we have three vantage points, or planes of
consciousness, from which we live. The first is the ego, the plane
of personality. The second is our individual soul, part of which is
the witness consciousness we talked about earlier. The third is the
mystic part of us. Quakers call it the still, small voice within, or
the inner light. Hindus call it the Atman. We can also think of it as
the One.
Each of us has all three of these channels. They are all here
simultaneously, but how you experience reality depends on which
one your awareness is tuned to. When you dwell deep in the
intuitive self, you are on the soul plane. If you follow that
awareness and go in and in, you will come to God awareness, to the
Atman. That same awareness is in you and in me. God
consciousness is the same in all of us. While we think we are our
incarnation, our soul witnesses it all, and ultimately connects us to
the universal God consciousness that dwells within each of us.
These days I see myself as a soul who has taken incarnation in a
body that suffered a stroke. So while my ego thought I was a
person with a stroke, that suffering pushed me into my soul, which
witnesses or watches the incarnation. It’s much less painful to
watch the stroke than to have the stroke.
I have pains throughout my body. I list them for my doctors.
But I don’t identify with them. I identify with being a witness of
pain. Physical pain is in the body, and I am not my body. My body
is out there, and I am in here. Pain is part of the body. Now if we’re
talking about psychological pain, that is from the ego, which is
also out there. I remember I am my consciousness, my awareness. I
am inside, and I live with the pain—not as the pain, but with the
pain.
That is another way the stroke proved beneficial: it pushed me
into my soul. Instead of leaving me wallowing in the physical
problems of my incarnation, it gave me a leg up and took me into
my soulless.
IS IT SUFFERING OR IS IT GRACE?
Recall the story from the Ramayana in which Havana, the demon
king, kidnaps Site, the earth mother or the soul who is married to
God, RAM. He carries her away to the demon capital on the island
of Sri Lanka. As the army of monkeys and bears arrives at the
ocean shore in India looking for Site, Jamaican, the king of the
bears, reminds Hangman that he has divine powers. Then Hangman
takes his great leap of faith and flies over the ocean to find Site.
As I struggled in my mind to accept this stroke, a message came
from a dear friend in India. In the same way that Hangman needed
to be reminded of his power, my friend K.K. SAH in India felt I
should be reminded of the power of my faith. K.K. wrote some
simple words that Maharajah had said to him about me: “I will do
something for him.” Just that remembrance was enough to recall
my faith. My soul was once again enveloped in Maharajah’s
blanket of love.
Sindhi Ma, the “Mother” in India who maintains Maharajah’s
ashrams, saw Mickey Lemme’s documentary film about me and the
stroke, which was called Fierce Grace. In the film, I talked about
trying to see the stroke as Maharajah’s grace. She sent me a
message that Maharajah would never give me a stroke. I finally
realized that the stroke was the natural result of my own karma.
Maharajah’s grace lay in helping me deal with the effects of the
stroke. It is true that being able to deal with the suffering from the
stroke changed my life.
I certainly wouldn’t wish a stroke on anyone, but mine has had
its positive side. Although I lost my faith for a while, over time it
has been tempered and deepened. Although for a time I was
overwhelmed by the suffering, eventually I found a place in myself
that has faith that this stroke is part of my awakening. That was the
grace.
Living with both the perfection and the pain of the suffering
allows me to stay with the pain without pushing it away, because I
have that balance within myself. I’m part of the unfolding of it all,
and that includes suffering.
When Phyllis, my stepmother, was dying, the pain she went
through forced her to give up clinging to her body and led to her
spiritual awakening during the few days before she died. I wouldn’t
have given her that pain, but who am I to judge? As a human being
with an emotional heart, I am faced with the paradox that I want to
relieve suffering, while at the same moment there is another part of
me that understands that sometimes there is grace in suffering.
From a spiritual point of view, suffering is sometimes the
sandpaper that awakens people. Once you start to awaken
spiritually, you reperceive your own suffering and start to work
with it as a vehicle for further awakening.
When you suffer, the suffering seems to envelop your world.
Think of a framed picture of a cloud. If the picture is cropped too
closely, you see only the gray of the cloud. If the picture is cropped
to a wider angle, you see the blue sky all around it. That’s grace.
FAITH
The whole game is based on faith. Faith comes through grace. In
the Bible, the apostle Paul says, “For it is by grace you have been
saved, through faith—and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift
of God—not by works, so that no one can boast.”
When the faith is strong enough, it is sufficient just to be.
Without faith, the existential fears and uncertainties that we all
have dominated. If you have faith, you have no fear. If you don’t
have faith, you fear.
As I questioned my own faith after the stroke, I began to ask,
“Faith in what?” I found that my faith is in the One—not faith in
Maharajah as a person, but faith in him as a doorway to the One,
faith in the One in Maharajah. Oneness is a state of being. Again,
this is the state where, as the great South Indian saint Ramona
Maharishi said, “God, guru, and Self are one.” Maharajah simply
held up one finger and said, “Sub EK”—it’s all One.
Faith is the reflection of that oneness in the mirror of your soul.
Faith is the way you connect to that universal truth of oneness.
Faith and love are intimately entwined. As it says in the Ramayana,
without devotion, there is no faith; without faith, there is no
devotion.
Faith is not a belief. Beliefs are in the head. Faith is in the heart.
Faith comes from within you. You cultivate it by opening your
spiritual heart and quieting your mind until you feel your identity
with your deeper Self. That opening to the deeper Self, when you
have quieted your mind. Comes through grace. The qualities of that
Self are peace, joy, compassion, wisdom, and love.
IT’S ALL PERFECT
Having been in the presence of Maharajah, I have come to trust the
way a being like that is in the universe. It’s like knowing
somebody who lives a little farther up the mountain and can see
farther than you can. The view from there is perfection—not
perfection as something to be achieved, but perfection in what is.
Maharajah kept saying to me in various ways, “Ram Days, don’t
you see it’s all perfect?” And yet Maharajah spent all his life being
there for people, helping them with their lives, feeding them, and
just loving them.
The art of life is to stay wide open and be vulnerable, yet at the
same time to sit with the mystery and the awe and with the
unbearable pain—to just be with it all. I’ve been growing into that
wonderful catchphrase, “be here now,” for the last forty years.
Here and now has within it a great richness that is just enough.
If somebody asks me, “Ram Days, are you happy?” I stop and
look inside. “Yes, I’m happy.” “Ram Days, are you sad?” “Yes, I’m
sad.” Answering those questions, I realize that all of those feelings
are present. Imagine the richness of a moment in which everything
is present: the pain of a broken heart, the joy of a new mother
holding her baby, the exquisiteness of a rose in bloom, the grief of
losing a loved one. This moment has all of that. It is just living
truth.
The saving grace is being able to witness suffering from the
perspective of the soul. Another way to say it is that the saving
grace is having faith. Living in the fullness of the moment with joy
and suffering, witnessing it in all its perfection, our hearts still go
out to those who are suffering.
If we live at the moment, we are not in time. If you think, “I’m
a retired person. I’ve retired from my role,” you are looking back
at your life. It’s retrospective; it’s life in the rearview mirror. If
you’re young, you might be thinking, “I have my whole life ahead
of me. This is what I’ll do later.” That kind of thinking is called
time binding. It causes us to focus on the past or the future and to
worry about what comes next.
Getting caught up in memories of the past or worrying about the
future is a form of self-imposed suffering. Either retirement or
youth can be seen as moving on, a time for something different,
something new. Start fresh. It’s a new moment. Aging is not a
culmination. Youth isn’t preparation for later. This isn’t the end of
the line or the beginning. Now isn’t a time to look back or plan
ahead. It’s time to just be present. The present is timeless. Being at the moment, just being here with what is, is ageless, eternal.
It is extraordinary how near we are to our deeper being. It’s just
a thought away. And the thoughts that take us away from it create
so much suffering. The thought “I am this body” causes suffering. I
might think, “Well, my body used to be able to do this. My hair
didn’t use to be gray. I used to be stronger. I used to be thinner. Furthermore, I
used to be …” Those thoughts cause suffering because the body is
what it is. We do everything we can to stay safe and healthy, but
illness, age, and accidents still affect us. Maharajah said, “No one
has the power even to keep their own body safe.” The Buddha is
right: this body is in time. But we are just here, at this moment.
GIVING CARING
If you have had the grace to touch living spirit in your lifetime,
you know it can be a challenge to translate it into action in the
world. To put it another way, now that you know that home is
where the heart is, how do you live your life in such a way as to
deepen your spiritual connection? There are many paths—paths of
prayer, of study, of redirecting bodily energies in hath yoga, of
devotional singing in Kiran.
Many of us are strongly drawn to a path of service—the kind of
service designed to alleviate the suffering of our fellow beings,
service in deep harmony with the way of things, the dharma. When
it is guided by the heart, such service feels like making love with
God. Think of Mother Teresa seeing her beloved Jesus in all his
distressing disguises.
Giving and receiving, depending on how they’re done, can
nourish people on both ends. Those who receive can help others
feel graced and blessed to have the opportunity to serve. The art of
receiving is a mindset that says, “I am a soul; you are a soul. We
come together, and what roles we play is kind of irrelevant.”
Likewise, in serving, what you truly offer another being is your
own being. That is how true healing occurs—your open heart
allows the other person’s heart to open. Then caregiving becomes a
gift for everybody involved.
TAKING CARE OF DAD
Getting old, for example, can be a cause for more suffering, or it
can be a state of grace. People who have been fiercely independent
say, “I hate being dependent.” On the other hand, I see people who
are old and frail and need to be taken care of, but who are not at
odds with themselves. They are so graceful and loving in their
dependency that everybody who is taking care of them ends up
feeling taken care of too.
I changed my father’s diapers, as he had once changed mine.
People said, “Oh, how disgusting.” To him and me, it wasn’t
disgusting at all. It was a beautiful completion of a cycle. His mind
had turned inward, and he was radiantly happy, peaceful, and
relaxed. This was a guy who in his life had found happiness only in
outer things, and now was radiating inner joy. Something in him
transformed, and he turned into this other being. I was bathing him,
and it was like washing the Buddha—incredible, blessed out, all the
time. He didn’t even recognize his former self. As he got older, my
dad, who had been successful and active politically and socially,
became very quiet. He just smiled a lot. I used to sit with him, hold
his hand and watch the sunset. We had never done anything like
that before. That is grace.
When you get to those edges where you say, “I can’t handle
that” or “I’m not going to do that,” take a look at the mindset you
are holding onto. There is the root of your suffering. That’s where
your mind is in relation to what is.
SEEING BEYOND SUFFERING
My friend Wavy Gravy is a living example of how to transform
suffering. Among other roles, Wavy is a professional clown who
visits children in the hospital. In full clown costume, complete
with a big, round, red nose, he hangs out with children who are
critically ill or dying. He blows bubbles. Sometimes he plays
games with them. Sometimes he delights them with face paint.
Sometimes they just hang out, and he shares and lightens their
burdens.
Wavy says, “I don’t know. Burnt skin or bald heads on little
kids—what do you do? I guess you just face it. When the kids are
really hurting so bad, so afraid and probably dying, and
everybody’s heart is breaking, face it. Face it and see what happens
after that. See what to do next. I got the idea of traveling with
popcorn. When a kid is crying, I dab the tears with the popcorn and
pop it into my mouth or into his or hers. We sit around together
and eat the tears.”
When I was in India in 1971, there was tremendous devastation
in Bangladesh. I wanted to help, and I went to Maharajah to get his
blessings. He said to me, “Can’t you see it’s all perfect?” I loved
this man so deeply, but I remember feeling this was an obscenity.
How could he say children starving to death was perfect? Yet this
was a man of incredible compassion. He fed everybody, and he
helped people all day all the time. He was saying I had lost my
balance and had become so obsessed with the suffering that I
couldn’t see the greater picture.
This is about where you stand in your awareness, in a place that
allows you to be with suffering in the world without closing your
heart. If you close or armor your heart in order to be in the world,
you become a crippled instrument for the healing of the universe.
So you do all you can to relieve suffering and work to keep your
heart open.
Another Indian saint, Swami “Papa” RAMDAC, lived his life in
continuous devotion to RAM. One night when he was sleeping
outside by a river, he was being bitten by mosquitoes so much he
couldn’t sleep. His response was, “Oh RAM, thank you for bringing
these mosquitoes and waking me, so I could think about you all
night.”
Most of us are not quite ready for that. However, the
recognition that suffering is a fire that purifies is an important
concept. For a person who has not awakened, the game is to
optimize pleasure and minimize suffering. As you become more
aware, you recognize the reality of the Buddha’s first Noble Truth:
that existence on this plane involves suffering. The more conscious
you become, the more you recognize that suffering is how the
teaching you need at the moment is coming down. How you
experience that suffering depends on your attachment, on how
much you identify with what the Buddha describes as “the transient
non-self,” what we call the ego—who we think we are.
Consider what it’s like to have a handicapped child—usually
seen as a situation of sadness, suffering, and misfortune. But a
different perception is that this soul has taken birth in this form
with certain work to do. Part of that work is to recognize that he or
she may not be fully understood or appreciated by the world
around them. Your human heart as a parent wants to take away
your child’s suffering. But if you cultivate your spiritual awareness
and meet this being as a soul, you can help him or her make
contact with that part of their being that has nothing to do with a
disability. As long as you see the child as being disabled, you are
reinforcing that particular reality in which he or she is going to
suffer. Meet the soul behind the disability. In that way, your work
on yourself is an offering to your child.
I had a young friend, Kelly, whose body was quadriplegic. He
had a misdiagnosed head injury when he was about nine years old.
He was fully awake and brilliant, and at thirty-three years old, he
was absolutely a delight. You could hold his hand over an alphabet
board, and he could spell out words to communicate. Once when I
was speaking before a group of doctors and holistic health healers,
I had Kelly introduce me. About five hundred people were in the
audience and Kelly was wheeled out onto the stage. They were all
agape. Kelly spelled out, “RD says we are not our bodies. Amen.”
HOW CAN WE HELP?
We often feel helpless in the face of suffering, especially the
suffering of those close to us, and we wonder how we can help.
Simple acts of kindness are so meaningful, like the quiet moments
between people taking loving care of one another, or the support
and kindness of friends and family expressing concern, offering
help, prayers, and food. Food can be so much more than physical
nourishment. Or perhaps you offer a flower from your garden, or
just listen to the fears and feelings of someone who is suffering, so
they know they are not alone. Sometimes just being there with an
open heart and a presence grounded in peace and serenity is
enough. These are reminders of grace that happen when you least
expect them—reminders that nourish the soul.
COMPASSION
Bearing the unbearable is the deepest root of compassion in the
world. When you bear what you think you cannot bear, who you
think you are dies. You become compassion. You don’t have
compassion—you are compassion. True compassion goes beyond
empathy to being with the experience of another. You become an
instrument of compassion.
Your own suffering—be it loss, failure, grief, or physical pain
—hurts like hell. Your heart may be broken. And yet, here you are.
You may have had an experience of suffering that burned deep
into you and created a different quality of your being. You see the
way that suffering forced your awakening. It’s hard to imagine a
spiritual curriculum in which Suffering 101 is not part of the
course for becoming a full human being. It’s a fierce teaching.
Part of that teaching is beginning to see through, or give up,
seeking pleasure and avoiding pain, the pattern of desire and
aversion that fastens you so intimately to Maya, the illusion of
separation. Something happens when you stop trying so hard to
avoid suffering. When you wish it were different, you can’t see
how it is. There’s a line in the Tao Te Ching that says, “Truth waits
for eyes unclouded by longing.” As you clear the mist of desire
from your mirror, you start to reflect things as they are.
As you dwell more in loving awareness and see things as they
truly are, you begin to expand beyond the boundaries of your
separateness. You start to experience the outer world in a new way,
so that instead of being in relationship to someone else, you
become them. At that moment, the suffering of the universe is
inside of you, not outside. True compassion arises out of the plane
of consciousness where I am you, where you and I are one.
This is a Buddhist loving-kindness blessing, part of the Etta
Meditation:
May all beings be free from danger.
May all beings be free from mental suffering.
May all beings be free from physical suffering.
May all beings know peace.
OM
Chapter 7
Content to Be
BEACH DAY
Once a week, I go to the beach on Maui for an ocean swim with a
core crew of regulars. The rest of the group varies depending on
who’s visiting the island. We hang out on the beach for a while,
and then we go in the water. Tom brings a bag of flowers and
lovingly casts them on the water as we start to swim out toward the
buoy marking the swimming area. I absolutely love being in the
ocean. Sometimes we sing; often we laugh. We are just floating in
Mother Ocean, surrounded by love. We play ball in the water. My
ritual is to touch the float and say, “Oh buoy, oh buoy, oh buoy!” I
have to be persuaded to return to the beach.
One day someone came up on the beach and asked what we
were celebrating. One of the group said, “We’re celebrating
because it’s today, and we’re together.” We weren’t being
facetious. We meant to recognize the everyday sacredness of
everything—everything.
Beach day is a perfect reflection of my feeling of contentment.
You may be thinking it’s easy to be content on a beach in Maui.
It’s true—it’s a nice beach. But this is not about physical
contentment. In yoga, Santosh, or contentment, is a practice that
helps you to quiet your mind and open your heart.
Contentment is one of the mindsets you use to direct your
consciousness toward oneness. Oneness is the name of the game in
yoga. True contentment is not just existential. It is an attitude of
the soul rather than of the ego or personality. It is a view of life
from the soul plane.
Love and compassion are emotions that arise from the soul.
When you identify with your soul, you live in a loving universe.
The soul loves everybody. It’s like the sun. It brings out the beauty
in each of us. You can feel that love radiating from your heart.
When we are in that love, we enjoy just being wherever we are.
There is a lot to be said for contentment like that.
Think of the kinds of experiences that give you a feeling of
contentment. Maybe your contentment comes from being in nature,
listening to the birds or the sound of the waves meeting the shore,
looking at the sunset or the stars in the night sky, or contemplating
a rose in the garden. Maybe it comes from singing or listening to
music, sinking into a warm bath, or being touched in a way that
eases the body. Maybe it comes from watching your child or being
with your dog or cat. Maybe you experience it when looking into
the eyes of a loved one. Those are experiences that touch your soul.
Contentment isn’t high on the priority list in the West. We’re
all about achievement and consuming, getting more. Maybe we’re
afraid the wheels of progress and the economy will grind to a halt
if everybody becomes content. I remember someone once accusing
meditators of “bovine passivity.” Living at the moment, being
fully present, is anything but passive. But it does lead to a
profound feeling that everything is just enough, a feeling of deep
contentment.
Much of my sense of contentment comes from my relationship
with Maharajah and the constant remembrance of his presence in
my life. Being in relationship with him is like having an infinitely
deep pool of love and wisdom that always mirrors my deepest
being.
And you are ever again the wave
sweeping through all things
RAINER MARIA RILKE, BOOK OF HOURS
I found in Maharajah something that satisfied both my intellect
and my heart. There was an intense degree of love, an oceanic
feeling of love that pervaded the space he inhabited. There was an
aura around him, a presence so powerful that you felt bathed and
purified just by being anywhere near it. Even now, as I bring him
into my heart, it does the same thing.
Since the day when I met with my Lord,
There has been no end to the sport of our love.
I see with eyes open and smile and behold His beauty
everywhere.
I utter his name and whatever I see it reminds me of Him.
Whatever I do it becomes His worship.
…
Wherever I go I move round Him.
All I achieve is His service.
When I lie down, I lie prostrate at His feet.
…
Whether I rise or sit down I can never forget Him.
For the rhythm of His music beats in my ears.
AIR
My love for Maharajah is my way of opening myself. He is
constantly here, constantly reminding me of his presence. Moment
by moment, I’m just hanging out with this being of consciousness,
of love, of light, of presence.
These are some of the things Maharajah said about love:
The worst punishment is to throw someone out of your heart.
You should not disturb anyone’s heart.
Even if a person hurts you, give him love.
If you love God, you overcome all impurities.
You should love everyone as God. If you do not love each
other, you cannot achieve your goal.
Christ said to love all beings as children of God and serve
them.
Give everything to the poor, even your clothing. Give it all
away.
Jesus gave everything away, even his body.
Someone asked Maharajah how to meditate, and he replied,
“Meditate the way Christ meditated.” When asked how Christ did
meditate, Maharajah said, “He lost himself in love.” He also said,
“Christ was one with all beings, and he had great love for all in the
world. He was crucified so that his spirit could spread throughout
the world. He was one with God. Furthermore, he sacrificed his body for the
dharma. He never died. Furthermore, he never died. Furthermore, he is the Atman living in
the hearts of all. All beings are reflections of Christ.
“You will get pure love for RAM by the blessings of Christ.
Hangman and Christ are one. They are the same.”
Maharajah was asked what was the best method of meditation.
He said, “Do as Jesus did and see God in everyone. Take pity on all
and love all as God. When Jesus was crucified, he felt only love.”
GETTING HIP
One day in 2009, I went to get a book, and I had an accident. I fell
on my hip. There it was—a broken hip. I’m over eighty years old
now, so I guess it comes with the territory. But that broken hip was
my own fault. I’m in a wheelchair much of the time, and that day
when I was transferring to the wheelchair, I didn’t focus carefully,
and I fell. The dilemma for me is that if I pay attention to my body
full-time, even when I am transferring, my consciousness doesn’t
get to be with my soul because I’m attending to my body, as most
people do. I guess that inattention is a symptom of my separateness
—if I were really living in the One, there’d be no difference
between soul consciousness and body consciousness.
So I’m in the hospital getting my hip repaired. Hospitals are
body oriented. They’re body shops. To most of the hospital staff, I
am the old guy in Room 322 with a broken hip. That’s who I am in
their professional view. Nurses and doctors are souls whose roles
include seeing the problems of the body and treating them. So they
must know, right?
The overwhelming mindset in a hospital is that we are our
bodies. But aren’t we also souls? Now, my view is that I am in this
incarnation to learn about my true Self, to learn about my soul.
Along the way I have also learned about strokes and broken hips.
As I learned, you can think about them in many different ways.
From my point of view, the workings of the body are grist for
the mill to get to the soul. It’s tough work because these bodies
really capture our attention. Learning to swim is nothing compared
to learning to live from the soul plane.
In our minds the body is out there and the soul, the “I,” is in
here. To get to my soul, I have to turn my attention inward instead
of outward. But I have to turn it selectively inward, because at the
same time the body is demanding attention, and I better decide
where my foot should go, or I am going to get myself killed. So I
attend to my body when it’s time to, and the rest of the time I work
on being a soul.
The body and soul are like a coach and horses and a coachman.
The horses are desires. The coachman is the ego, the “I” that
controls the desires and looks where he’s going (and makes sure
the foot doesn’t go in the wrong place). But inside the coach is a
passenger. Who is riding in the coach? It’s our soul. “Coachman,
would you stop, please?” “Coachman, you are going a little too
fast.”
I am riding in my coach, and now and then my coach needs a
grease job or a new bearing or a joint replaced. I’m in the coach
shop for a hip joint, and they’re the coach repair experts. That’s
fine as long as I know who I am—that I’m not the coach, that I am
a passenger inside the coach riding along, merrily, merrily,
merrily.
On the outside I am recovering from a hip replacement
operation, but inside I am dancing. I look like an old fart, but I am
dancing inside. And what a joyful, joyful dance! In India, it’s called
the Lila, the dance or the love play of the soul. And you can join in
t h e Lila anytime, because it’s always going on. Here at this moment, it never stops.
Did I lose my soul in the hospital? Well, maybe I lost the
connection with my soul for a while, but I didn’t lose my soul.
Where could it go? I’m still here. I have a new hip. Furthermore, I’m even
hipper than I was.
ROLES TO SOULS
As we’ve discussed, within our consciousness are these different
points of view. There’s the ego and there’s the soul, our spiritual
self. They are two different planes of consciousness. From the
spiritual vantage point, we are all souls who have come into these
incarnations. We take birth, and this is our incarnation. Here we
are, each of us an individual being.
When I used to travel back and forth from America to India, I
would land in New Delhi and take a bus up to a village in the
mountains. The people in that village knew they were souls. One
was sweeping the road, and another was the governor. The
governor was not just a governor, and the sweeper was not just
busy being a sweeper. They had these roles for this incarnation, but
they also identified themselves as souls. I’d go back to America,
and when they opened the plane door in New York, everyone
thought they were their roles. I’d go back and forth, roles to souls,
souls to roles.
Because of the pull of the incarnation, we get so deeply into our
roles that we forget we are souls. With all the sensations, emotions,
and complications of being in a body, all the desires, we forget. We
think, “I am a man. I am a woman. I am from California. Furthermore, I am a
mother, a father, a widow, a child”—a something. “I’ve got to be
something, don’t I?”
Think of all the ways you identify yourself with what you do: “I
am a teacher. I am a doctor, I’m a scientist. I’m a cook, a Jew or
Christian or Muslim, a stockbroker. I’m an achiever. Furthermore, I am a
spiritual seeker.”—That one can carry you for years—“I am
retired.”
All that is the ego, who you think you are, the cluster of
thoughts about how you identify yourself, thoughts about different
roles that you play in society. When we meet someone we ask,
“How do you do? And what do you do?” But is what you do the
same as who you are?
Every one of our roles is a thought form. We confuse our souls
with our roles. You don’t see me as a soul. You see me as Ram
Days, as a body, a role. What does it matter whether I am a cellist,
or a pilot, or a teacher? When you strip away the roles, this outer
form is just the body. Who I am is just here. Instead of “How do
you do?” how about, “How do you be?” Our inner being is beyond
form.
When you live from your soul and your heart is open, you can
awaken other souls. You go into a grocery store, and it’s like a
temple. Everybody is a soul. Some think they are customers; some
think they work there. You get to the checkout, and your eyes lock
for an instant with the clerk’s. “Are you here? I’m here. Wow, a
fellow soul!”
If you have children, your children are souls. They’re just
playing the roles of children, and you’re in the mother or father
role.
If you’re with a dying person, and you see them as a soul, that
transition from ego to soul is easier to make. If, as a caregiver,
you’re identified with your soul, it is easy to see the dying person
as a soul and to ease their transition.
JUST A MOMENT, PLEASE!
When we plumb the moment—this moment, not back then, not the
future, but this moment—we get deeper and deeper and deeper into
the universal heart of being. Finally, being at the moment
blossoms into everything and nothing. It’s all at this moment. This
moment is always here. Now is eternal.
That joy you get from being completely at the moment brings
contentment. Contentment, as a practice, is different from
satisfaction. It’s not a feeling of accomplishment from doing
something. Contentment is just being complete at the moment.
Burrow into the moment. Then you’re at the moment, and here
we are at the moment. If something is taking me out of the
moment, I’ll say, “What am I doing here?” or “What is it that
blocks my contentment? It’s raining. Doesn’t rain make me
content? The flowers are so grateful, and the rain is just beautiful,
little drops on the window. They’re each like little globes. And
now I’m content.”
I’m content to take a nap without thinking I should be doing
something else. I’m even content to have a broken hip that’s
healing. It’s part of the body growing old. But I am just here.
When I first traveled to India in 1966, I was just another
Westerner visiting a foreign country. I was with a friend traveling
in a Land Rover. We had canned tuna fish and Vivaldi tapes, beds,
and all kinds of Western amenities. We looked out through the
windows at this foreign culture.
When we came to Bewares, the holy city where Hindus go to
die, people were walking the streets with leprosy and all kinds of
illnesses, just waiting to die. They each had a pouch, a little bundle
of cloth, that held the coins for their funeral pyre, to pay for the
wood to burn their body.
As we drove through this city, I thought, “These people have no
hospital. They have no support system. They’re just waiting to
die.” These depressing thoughts and the ubiquitous poverty made
me feel awful. When we got to the hotel, I hid under the bed.
I visited Bewares again six months later. It was the same scene,
but in those six months I had been living in a Hindu temple up in
the Himalayas under my guru’s tutelage. Now, instead of being just
a Westerner, I was maybe a Hind-Jew or a little Buddhist. I began
to see that Bewares was a city of incredible joy, even though it held
incredible physical suffering. Instead of seeing “those poor
people,” instead of being overwhelmed and pushing away their
pain, I could stop to look in their eyes.
I saw two things. First, they looked at me with compassion, as if
I were a hungry ghost, a homeless spirit wandering from place to
place. And second, they themselves were content.
How could they be content amidst all that suffering? They were
content because if you are a Hindu and you die in Bewares by the
holy river Ganges, Shiva whispers in your ear and liberates you.
These beings were in the right place at the right time. They were
dying in the perfect place for a Hindu to die.
Their contentment really got to me. How could they be so
content? It conflicted with all my Western values. My Western life
had always been about achievement, wanting, desiring, doing
more, getting more. I always felt as if I were in the wrong place at
the wrong time because there must be something better. I was
forever collecting the next achievement. But those people in
Bewares had something I hadn’t been able to collect: contentment.
ALL YOU NEED IS …
If I am in my soul, when I look at others, I see their souls. I still
see the individual differences—men and women, rich and poor,
attractive and unattractive, and all that stuff. But when we
recognize each other as souls, we are seeing each other as aspects
of the One. Love is the emotion of merging, of becoming One.
Love is a way of pushing through into the One.
We treat love and hate and the other emotions like they are all
on the same level, but they’re not. Hate, fear, lust, greed, jealousy
—all that comes from the ego. Only love comes from the soul.
When you identify with your soul, you live in a loving universe.
The soul loves everybody. It’s like the sun. It brings out the beauty
in each of us. You can feel it in your heart.
In those early days of being with Maharajah, he would tell me
repeatedly, “Ram Days, love everyone and tell the truth.” At that
time I could only touch that place for occasional moments. I was
living most of the time on the ego plane. I could love almost
everyone for short periods of time, but the truth was that I did not
love everyone. There was that day when I was so angry with
everyone and Maharajah came up to me, nose to nose, looked me
in the eye, and said, “Ram Days, love everyone and tell the truth.”
He was telling me to take a different path and become a soul. What
he was saying is that when I can relate from that soul plane of
consciousness, which is who I really am, I will love everyone. That
is my truth. It’s only taken me forty years to figure it out.
Learn the art of taking your stand on the Truth within. When
you live in this Truth, the result is the fusion of the mind and
the heart and the end of all fears and sorrow. It is not a dry
attainment of mere power or intellectual knowledge. A love
which is illumined by the intuitive wisdom of the spirit will
bless your life with ever-renewing fulfillment and never-ending sweetness.
METER BABA, LIFE AT ITS BEST
You can stay in touch with your soul by dwelling at the moment.
Soul is centered in your heart. It is the heart-mind. Do your daily
acts with love. That’s what the soul can do. When you are
identified with your soul, you not only reflect God’s light, but you
also become a mirror for others to find their souls. The only goal a
soul has is to satisfy God and become one with the Beloved.
Everything is as it should be. I say that because I’ve
surrendered, surrendered to the One. The One makes this moment
perfectly fulfilled—and I am quiet and peaceful inside. Go inside
for peace, go inside for compassion, go inside for wisdom, go
inside for joy, go inside for love.
MEDITATION: I AM LOVING AWARENESS
The Atman, the universal soul within all, manifests within you as
your individual soul, that part of you that is wisdom, compassion,
joy, love, and peace. Start by quieting down and going inside to
your spiritual heart space. Allow yourself to sink deeper and
deeper into your soul. Concentrate in the middle of your chest and
allow this phrase to reverberate in this heart space: “I am loving
awareness. I am loving awareness….” Allow it to become part of
you. Then with grace you will become just loving awareness.
Use your breath to continue centering: in, out, in, out. The
movement of air at the nostrils at the tip of your nose or the rise
and fall of your diaphragm in your belly are good places to keep
centering on your breathing. As your thoughts subside into the
ocean of the breath, keep bringing your concentration to the middle
of your heart space. That point is your spiritual heart. And that
loving awareness is you—it’s the real you, because you are
awareness. Now, you can be aware of your eyes and what they see;
you can be aware of the ears and what they hear; you can be aware
of your skin and what it feels. You can be aware of your mind and
the river of thoughts that flows from your mind. Thoughts,
thoughts, thoughts …
Some of those thoughts are positive; some are negative; some
are about you and about others. Some of them are judging
thoughts. But you stay identified with loving awareness in your
heart, in the heart center. “I am loving awareness. I am loving
awareness. I am loving awareness. Furthermore, I am loving awareness.”
Awareness is not a thing. We can label it, but it is not the words.
You are loving awareness. So is Christ. So is Krishna. So is
Buddha. So is Maharajah. They are loving awareness, and so are
you. Loving awareness is one—one loving awareness.
Each of us is a finger of the hand of universal awareness.
Loving awareness is in everybody; everybody is in loving
awareness. Wars and disagreements, separate nations, those are the
games we play. Yet we are loving awareness. We are individuals,
but we’re not. We are all God. You are an individual, and you are
also part of the whole. You are loving awareness, and when you
finally get to be loving awareness, just be loving awareness.
BEING LOVE NOW
I honor the light in all of us. The more I love God, the more I love
the forms of God, which are all forms. Living from the soul is very
much a heart-center journey. I get on a bus, and by the time I get
off, I feel like I have met intimate family members I’ve known all
my life. We’re all in love with one another. To live in your
spiritual heart with the degree of openness it entails, trust in the
One. In that loving awareness, you are not as vulnerable as you
would be in the ego, where you think you are separate from others.
How did the rose ever open its heart
And give to this world all of its beauty?
It felt the encouragement of light against its being,
Otherwise we all remain too frightened.
HAFIZ, “HOW DID THE ROSE?” TRANSLATED BY DANIEL KANDINSKY
How does one become loving awareness? If I change my
identification from the ego to the soul, then as I look at people,
they all appear like souls to me. I change from my head, the
thought of who I am, to my spiritual heart, which is a different sort
of awareness—feeling directly, intuiting, loving awareness. It’s
changing from a worldly outer identification to a spiritual inner
identification. Concentrate on your spiritual heart, right in the
middle of your chest. Keep repeating the phrase, “I am loving
awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness.”
The object of our love is love itself. It is the inner light in
everyone and everything. Love is a state of being.
You begin to love people because they just are. You see the
mystery of the Divine in form. When you live in love, you see love
everywhere you look. You are literally in love with everyone you
look at.
When that starts to happen, as you fall in love with everyone
you meet, you may think you want to collect them all. So you get
one, and you say, “Let’s nest.” And you get furniture and drapes, and you make a nest. You go out to the supermarket to get tofu and
beer, and you look into the eyes of the person at the checkout
counter. The eyes are the windows of the soul, so you look, and
there’s your Beloved too. Now what are you going to do? You’ve
already got one at home. Do you say, “Have you considered a
ménage à trois?”
You have to graduate from a deprivation to an abundance
model. It’s abundant because you are it; you are radiating love
wherever you go. As you become love, when you walk down the
street, everyone is the most beautiful person all over again. You
look and appreciate. You may meet another’s eyes, and you both
recognize the love, but you don’t have to do anything about it.
The art form of relationship is to realize that every relationship
you are in—every relationship at every moment—is a vehicle for
awakening love. And it’s up to you. The Beloved is everywhere.
There was a moment when I was on a lecture tour, and I was
staying at a funky motel. It was one of those really plastic places. I
arrived, and I went into my room and I sat down, and I was starting
to set up my little pupa table on the plastic bureau. I was moving
the hotel menu and stuff and sitting there, and it was kind of
depressing. I thought, “Well, a few more weeks and this tour will
be over, and I can go home.” Then I saw the pain that thought was
creating.
I got up, and I walked out of the room, closed the door, walked
down the hall, turned around, came back, unlocked the door and
yelled, “I’m home!” I came in, and I sat down, and I looked, and I
thought to myself, “You know, I wouldn’t particularly have
decorated this way, but what the hell.”
If I am not at home anywhere in the universe, I’ve got a
problem. If I say I can only be home here, but not there, what is
home? Home is where the heart is. Home is the quality of presence.
It’s the quality of being. Home is always here.
Quiet your mind; let go of molds and models and thought
forms. Open your heart and let your thoughts and emotions get
consumed by the moment until you become just pure presence.
Now you are living in the Tao, and it is with you wherever you go.
Don’t go outside your house to see flowers.
My friend, don’t bother with that excursion.
Inside your body there are flowers.
One flower has a thousand petals.
That will do for a place to sit.
Sitting there you will have a glimpse of beauty
inside the body and out of it,
before gardens and after gardens.
AIR, “A PLACE TO SIT”
When you and I rest together in loving awareness, we swim
together in the ocean of love. Remember, it’s always right here.
Enter into the flow of love with a quiet mind and see all things
with love as part of yourself.
THE WHEEL OF ILLUSION
A soul takes a human birth in order to have a series of experiences
through which it will awaken out of its illusion of separateness.
This physical experience of being incarnated is the curriculum, and
the purpose of the course is to awaken us from the illusion that we
are the incarnation. Spiritual practices are tools to help us
accomplish these goals.
You start from innocence and you return to innocence. A sage
was asked, “How long have we been on this journey?” He replied,
“Imagine a mountain three miles wide, three miles high, and three
miles long. Once every hundred years, a bird flies over the
mountain, holding a silk scarf in its beak, which it brushes across
the surface of the mountain. In the time it takes for the scarf to
wear away the mountain, that’s how long we’ve been doing this.”
We are on an inevitable course of awakening. If you understand
that message deeply, it allows you to enter into your spiritual
practices from a different perspective, one of patience and
timelessness. You do your practices not out of a sense of duty or
because you think you should, but because you know in your soul
there really is nothing else you would rather do.
In Sanskrit this is called veranda, a state of weariness with
worldly desire where only the desire for spiritual fulfillment is left.
The spiritual pull is the last desire, one that really grabs you, but
that dissolves on its own because you dissolve in the process. The
Tao says, “In the end you will be like the valley which is the
favorite resort of the Way.” You become receptive, become soft,
become open, become attuned, become quiet. You become the
ocean of love.
The soul is made of love, and must ever strive to return to
love. It can never find rest nor happiness in other things. It
must lose itself in love.
MECHTHILD OF MAGDEBURG
In the end, all our other desires merge in the immense
longing to have no barrier between us and our real Beloved.
ELNATH EASTERN
Time is a box formed by thoughts of the past and future. When
there is only the immediate now—when you’re not dwelling in the
past or anticipating the future, but you are just right here, right now
—you’re outside of time. Dwelling at the moment is dwelling in
the soul, which is eternal presence.
When we’re outside of time, there’s no subject or object; it’s all
just here. The thinking mind deals only with subject and object.
But from within here now, you watch time go by. You are not
being in time. You be, and time goes by, as if you were standing on
a bridge and watching it all go by.
Ours is a journey toward simplicity, toward quietness, toward a
kind of joy that is not in time. In this journey out of time to
“Nowhere,” we are leaving behind every model we have had of
who we thought we were. This journey involves a transformation
of our being so that our thinking mind becomes our servant rather
than our master. It’s a journey that takes us from primary
identification with our psyche to identification with our souls, then
to identification with God, and ultimately beyond any
identification at all.
Life is an incredible curriculum in which we live richly and
passionately as a way of awakening to the deepest truths of our
being. As a soul, I have only one motive: to merge with God. As a
soul, I live at the moment, in each rich and precious moment, and I
am filled with contentment.
May the Blessings of God
Rest upon you.
May His Peace
Abide with you
May His Presence
Illuminate your heart Now and forever more.
SUFI PRAYER
Chapter 8
Practicing
in creating a daily spiritual practice? On they ARE THERE BENEFITS
level where we are pure souls, where we are simply loving
awareness, it doesn’t matter. There is just being here now. Living
fully at the moment, there is no practice, only being. If you have
become stable in this presence, ignore this chapter. You are already
here.
On the other hand, if your mind still wanders, you may find
some benefit in using these practices to bring you back to your
Self, to be more present, to open your heart, to learn to live from
your spiritual heart. Practices are designed to put you back in touch
with your true nature, the Self, to polish the mirror of your mind
and heart so they truly reflect the spirit.
Most of us are enmeshed in the world, and we get lost very
easily in the stuff of life. A daily practice is very useful to keep
reminding you, to keep pulling you back and waking you up again,
giving you a chance to see how you got lost the day before and to
keep putting what’s happening to you in the world back into a
spiritual perspective.
For instance, I read a little passage in the morning when I wake
up. I have books next to my bed, and I’ll just pick one up and start
the day reading a Smokey, a passage from a holy book, or a little
quote from a saint, and it will just start me remembering,
reminding me what the game is about.
You can tune to the spirit through a variety of practices. Look to
each method to keep opening you in its own unique way. At the
beginning, when you’re trying different methods, be generous with
yourself. There will be a method that will fit your unique karma. If
you come to a practice with a pure heart and a yearning to be free,
it will reflect the purity of your aspiration.
Spiritual practice isn’t a way to achieve something or to get
somewhere else. You’re already here. You do spiritual practices
because you do spiritual practices, not to get to some other state,
but to get in touch with who you already are, to clear the dust from
the mirror, to come more fully into the present moment. Whether
you will be free and enlightened now or in ten thousand births is
not the point. What else is there to do? You can’t stop doing them
anyway. Once you awaken to the possibility of the universe within,
it’s like a gravitational force.
Don’t get trapped in your expectations. Spiritual practices can
themselves become obstacles if you become too attached to them.
Use these methods as consciously as you can, knowing that if they
are truly working, eventually they will self-destruct.
MAKING A SACRED SPACE
Create a quiet corner in your home for practice—an Om home, a
launching pad to the infinite, a meditation seat, a shrine to your
inmost Self.
In India, worship is called pupa, and a pupa table or pupa room is
a sacred space for meditation, worship, prayer, reading holy books,
reflection, centering, doing mantra or chanting. It is a place for
remembering your Self, getting in touch with your guru, or just a
source of spiritual comfort. It can be a space for doing devotional
rituals or for making offerings of love, a flower, incense, food, or
just gratitude.
Make this space simple and pure: perhaps with a mat, a candle,
some incense, a picture of a realized being you feel connected to—
Buddha or Christ, RAM or Krishna, or your guru. Create a seat
where you can sit comfortably, with your back straight. Zen
Buddhists use a AFU and Zebulon, a meditation cushion and pad.
Use whatever helps you sit comfortably—a bench or a chair if you
need it. This is your sacred space.
Make your pupa table a beautiful offering that reflects what is
spiritually meaningful for you. It can be in a corner of a room, in a
closet, or if you have the space, in a separate room. You may wish
to cover the table with a cloth. A fresh flower as an offering to
your Beloved adds to the sweetness. Holy statues, photos of loved
ones you wish to bless, prayers written for family or friends who
are suffering or sick, may help open your heart. If you are having
problems with someone, try putting their picture on your pupa table
so that after meditating you can bring them into the Light. Keep
holy books nearby, handy for daily use.
If you already have an established pupa table, know that you can
never have too many sacred spaces. You can always deepen your
spiritual practices. Let Spirit permeate your life. Surround yourself
with images of the Divine, reminders of what is really important in
life. Let them help quiet your mind, open your heart, and bring
inner peace.
You can create small altars or shrines at your desk or in your
computer space, on a countertop, at the entryway of your home, on
the door of the refrigerator. Create a sanctuary in the garden, at
your doorstep, on the patio or deck, on the dashboard of your car.
Spiritualize your life from the outside, but know the real work is
within.
MORNING PRACTICE
As water wears away stone, so daily Sahara, or spiritual practice,
will thin the veil of illusion.
For starters, consider getting up a half hour earlier to allow time
for your spiritual practices.
Remove your shoes when you approach your pupa table. Invest
this space with a spirit of love, reverence, devotion, and gratitude.
Light some incense. Connect with the images on your pupa and
settle into just being here now! Let go of everything other than
being present in this sacred space.
If, as I mentioned, you can start your day in a conscious manner
by reading a passage from a holy book, you can bring it to mind as
an occasional reminder throughout the day. You might want to play
some peaceful music or chanting, or do some singing or chanting
yourself.
THE DAILY NOW
Keeping a journal helps you to have a reflection of your thoughts
and will give you a place to process and record teachings, feelings,
or insights that occur on this journey. At times, I’ve kept a diary of
how often during the day that I have lost it and got caught in the
drama of it all and started to take the illusion of Maya as real. I’d
just make a list and then look at the patterns of those lists over
days. They showed me the nature of my desire systems. They
showed me what it was that I made real.
You might want to record your reflections on the Words from
Realized Beings section at the end of this chapter and how they
apply to your life. As you go through the day, notice how often you
are truly present at the moment, when your heart is open, when it
closes down.
When you act in harmony with dharma, a quality of equanimity
comes into everything you do. Witness your life, your actions;
observe your motivations for doing things, your desires. See what
leads to anger, fear, greed, lust, love. Pull back. Do your meditative
practices. Watch the world go by from inside your spiritual heart.
Lose it. Examine it. Quiet down again. Lose it again. Write in
your journal. Watch what makes you lose it every time. Just watch
it all. No judging. Really get to know yourself.
Note what happens to your spiritual center in your relationships.
Your needs and desires may be giving someone else power over
you. Someone else’s ability to take you out of your equanimity has
to do with your attachment and the clinging of mind. That’s your
work on yourself.
MEDITATION is basic spiritual practice for quieting the mind and
getting in touch with our deeper Self, the spirit. Meditation
provides a deeper appreciation of the interrelatedness of all things
and the part each person plays. The simple rules of this game are
honesty with yourself about where you are in your life and learning
and listening to hear how it is. Meditation is a way of listening
more deeply, so you hear how it all is from a more profound place.
Meditation enhances your insight, reveals your true nature, and
brings you inner peace.
A meditation practice is extremely useful in clearing stuff away
and letting you see how your mind keeps creating your universe.
The ego will keep you occupied with its endless story line of
thought forms. Just keep watching them until they dissolve.
Most traditions require a regular practice in order to progress,
to get ahead. On the other hand, there are traditions in which no
regular practice is required and people do fine, so I can’t say it is
necessary. But I certainly find it useful, and I encourage other
people to do it.
Regularly practicing meditation, even when you don’t feel like
it, will help you see how your thoughts impose limits and color
your existence. Resistances to meditation are your mental prisons
in miniature.
It’s delicate, because you have to practice from the place of
really remembering why you’re doing it, with some joy and
appreciation. If you go into it with, “Oh, I have to do my practice,”
the practice will eventually clean that resistance out of you, but I
don’t necessarily feel that’s a good thing. That’s what happens to
people when they have to go to church every Sunday. I would
rather push you away from spiritual practices until you’re so
hungry for them that you really want to do a practice, rather than
give you a sense that you ought to do the practice or that you’re a
bad person if you don’t do it, because you will end up hating the
whole business. In the long run I don’t think it will be good for
you. Spiritual practice is wonderful if you want to do it. And if you
don’t, don’t.
There are many different forms of meditation from a host of
spiritual traditions. I will share with you some of the methods that
have been most effective for me over the years. They include
Vipāssana (or insight) meditation from the Southern Buddhist
tradition, mantra from Hindu Shakti devotional practice (including
how to practice mantra with a male, or rosary), and guru Krita
(grace of the guru) meditation.
Remember the story of a Westerner arriving at the ashram in
India and asking Maharajah how to meditate? Maharajah became
quiet and closed his eyes. After a few moments, a tear trickled
down his cheek, and he said,
“Meditate the way Christ meditated. He lost himself in Love.
Christ lives in the hearts of all beings. He never died. He never
died. “
Lose yourself in love.
When you are with someone you love very much,
you can talk, and it is pleasant, but the reality
is not in the conversation.
It is simply in being together.
Meditation is the highest form of prayer.
In it, you are so close to God that you don’t need to say a
thing
It’s just great to be together.
SWAMI CHIMAMANDA
Vipāssana Meditation
Vipāssana, or insight meditation, is a fundamental Buddhist
meditation, drawn from Southern Buddhism. The focus or primary
object of this meditation is the breath, and the beginning practice is
just following the breath. Concentration on the breath is called
antenna, and it is just bringing you right here, now, through the
breath. Everyone breathes. We all have our individual differences, but we are all breathing in and breathing out.
Sit comfortably, with your body as straight as is comfortable,
your head, neck, and chest aligned. Take two or three intentional
slow, deep breaths, and close your eyes.
Focus on your breath going in and your breath coming out. Two
ways you can do this are:
By focusing on the muscle in the solar plexus, which every time
you breathe in, moves in one direction, and every time you
breathe out, moves in another direction—rising, falling, rising,
falling.
By focusing on the inside of your nostrils at the tip of your nose
—as the air goes by, you will feel a slight whisper of air on the
in breath, and as the air goes out, you will feel a slight whisper
of air on the out breath.
Use whichever of those two spots is easiest for you to do. Pick one
focus, either the rising and falling of the muscle in your abdomen
or the air going by the tip of your nose, and stay with it for a period
of at least fifteen minutes.
You are like a gatekeeper at the gate. Cars go in and cars go out.
You don’t need to see where they go. You just notice the breath
going in, breathing in, and the breath going out, breathing out.
Your job is solely to focus your awareness on your primary object
of the breath in the gentlest way possible.
Your awareness is going to wander; it is going to be grabbed by
many stray thoughts. You’ll sit down, and you’ll say, “Breathing in,
breathing out” or “Rising, falling.” Then the thought will come,
“This will never work.” Now you can either take that thought “This
will never work” and immediately go off on another train of
thought, and even though you have instructions to follow, you just
ignore them and then the meditation time is over. That’s okay. Or
at some point when you get tired of that, you can say, “Gee, all I
was going to do for these fifteen minutes was watch my breath.
This is just another thought. Maybe I’ll just let it go, and I’ll go
back to watching my breath.” See, that’s a strategy for gently
bringing your mind back to the breath, for coming back to your
awareness.
The art is to not get violent with your other thoughts. Don’t try
to push them away. Don’t feel guilty because you are thinking
them. They’re just thoughts. Very gently, again and again, simply
bring your awareness back to the primary object of meditation:
breathing in, breathing out. Just keep coming back to the focus of
your meditation, back to the breath, back to awareness of the
breath.
Whether your breathing gets fast or slow doesn’t matter; just
notice it. Don’t try to change it, but just notice it. You are merely
remaining aware: the gatekeeper watching the gate open and close.
Any sounds, smells, or sensations, just let them come and let them
go and bring your awareness back to either rising and falling or
breathing in and breathing out.
If your mind wanders, just notice it, then very gently bring it
back to breathing in and breathing out or rising and falling.
Wherever your mind is now, just notice where it is and very gently
bring it back to rising and falling or breathing in and breathing out.
If it helps to think to yourself “Breathing in, breathing out” with
each breath, that is perfectly okay. If it helps to count breaths, try
counting to ten, counting each in- and out-breath cycle as one, and
then start over. If your mind wanders off in the middle, start over.
Sometimes it can be really hard to get to ten! But don’t judge
yourself, don’t get frustrated, there’s no success or failure—only
your awareness of the breath.
All the sounds, everything that comes into your ears, just notice
them as more thoughts and come back to your breath. There is
nothing you need to think about now other than breathing in and
breathing out or rising and falling.
Notice the shape and form as the breath goes by—the
beginning, middle, and end of the in breath; the space in between;
the beginning, middle, and end of the out breath; and again the
space.
If you experience agitation or confusion or boredom or bliss or
anything, just see it as another thought. Notice it and bring your
awareness back to rising and falling or breathing in and breathing
out.
If you begin to doze, take a few deep intentional breaths. Rising
and falling or breathing in and breathing out. All the feelings in
your body—the sounds, the sensations, the tastes, the smells, the
sights—just notice them coming and going and bring your
awareness back to the primary object of meditation.
Firm your seat, head straight, rising and falling or breathing in
and breathing out. If you are getting to the end of your sit, use
these last minutes consciously. There is no beginning and no end.
Every breath is the first and last.
Gently but firmly each time your mind wanders, bring it back to
rising and falling or breathing in and breathing out. Be vigilant but
gentle. Bring the awareness back to the basic primary object of
meditation, the breath.
If your mind becomes agitated in the course of the day, bring it
back to the breath, rising and falling, breathing in and breathing
out.
OM
Meditation on the Guru
Imagine a realized being standing before you, someone to whom
you feel particularly attuned, such as Christ, Mary, Mohammad,
RAM, Hangman, Anandamide Ma, or your guru. This being is
radiant, luminous, with eyes that are filled with compassion. You
feel this being radiating the wisdom that comes from an intimate
harmony with the universe.
It is just so incredibly gentle and beautiful to start a dialogue of
love with a being who is love. Sit in your meditation area and gaze
at a picture of a being whose love is pure, whose love reflects the
light of God. Experience that love flowing back and forth between
you and the picture. Just open yourself and surrender.
See yourself reflected in those compassionate, nonjudging eyes,
and allow yourself to open more and more. This is your Beloved.
Sit before this being, or imagine such a being sitting in your heart.
Just be with that being and return the love. Despite all the
impurities to which you cling, despite all your feelings of
unworthiness, such a being loves you unconditionally. It’s OK to
carry on imaginary conversations with this being; the exchange
opens you to compassion, tranquility, warmth, patience—to all the
qualities of a free being.
This interpersonal quality of devotional meditation allows you
to start from your psychological need to love and to be loved and
to bring it into the presence of wisdom, compassion, and peace.
When you are with a being who embodies these qualities, they rub
off, and you feel more evolved, even to the point of recognizing the
radiant light within yourself. Acknowledging your own beauty
allows you to open even more to the Beloved, until finally the
lover and Beloved merge, and you find that what you had seen
outwardly as perfection in your Beloved is a mirror of your own
inner beauty.
Ultimately you become that kind of love. You’re living in that
space and don’t need anybody to turn you on to love because you
are it, and everybody who comes near you drinks of it. And as you
become more and more the statement of love, you fall into love
with everyone.
Mantra
A mantra is a repeated prayer, words, a holy name, or a sacred
sound or sounds. It’s like a tape loop going on inside that reminds
me of who I am. It’s like a niche in the wall where the candle flame
never flickers. It always brings me right back into to my heart, into
the eternal present.
A mantra can be a name or names of God, in Sanskrit or English
or Spanish or whatever language you know. It is usually recited
silently in the mind, though at times you may want to say it aloud
or subvocally, still keeping it internalized and without intruding on
other people’s psychic space. Sanskrit is interesting because it is
based on seed syllables, or big mantras, that set up vibrational
fields through sound. They work even when recited silently,
reverberating within.
Some mantras are more conceptual. All mantra works by
repetition. Practiced consistently, mantra has the ability to steady
the mind and transform consciousness. Mantra should be repeated
frequently. It can be repeated any time, any place—when you’re
walking, taking a shower, washing the dishes, waiting in line for
the movies.
In Buddhism, the word “mantra” means “mind protecting.” A
mantra protects the mind by preventing it from going into its usual
mechanical habits, which often are not our optimal conscious
perspective. Mantra is a powerful spiritual practice for centering
and for letting go of strong emotions, such as fear, anxiety, and
anger. The more you practice mantra, the more it becomes a part of
you. When you need it on the psychological level—for example,
when you feel afraid—using your witness, you notice the fear and
replace the fear with your mantra. This will occur naturally once
mantra becomes an established practice. Mantra is a daily
reminder of the presence of the Divine within ourselves and in the
universe.
Mahatma Gandhi said, “The mantra becomes one’s staff of life
and carries one through every ordeal. It is no empty repetition. For
each repetition has a new meaning, carrying you nearer and nearer
to God.”
Keep repeating your mantra consciously until it becomes a
strong habit. Go for a walk and say the mantra all the time you are
walking. Notice everything but keep the mantra going. Keep
realizing that being with God is your focus—and therefore
everything you see is part of God.
Maharajah said, “The best form in which to worship God is in
all forms.” Everyone you meet is RAM, who has come to teach you
something. Mantra is remembering that place in the heart. RAM,
RAM, RAM. Say it, mouth it, think it, feel it in your heart. You are
continually meeting the Beloved and merging into perfection.
The Divine is present in the soul of all living beings and
throughout the universe. God has been called by different names in
different ages, countries, and religions. According to the Hindu
view, an avatar is an incarnation of divine consciousness in human
form. An avatar takes birth at a time when spiritual teaching is
needed to establish new pathways for realization. RAM, Krishna,
Buddha, and Jesus are all avatars in the Hindu view. Their names
evoke divine power and are often used in mantra.
Once you choose a mantra and establish a practice, it is a good
idea not to change mantras too much. If you stick with the same
mantra, the practice will become deeper. Following are some
mantras; you can select one that feels right for you or find one
from a tradition that feels comfortable to you. Use whatever name
you associate with the Divine.
My guru, Need Karol Baba, used RAM, and he often could be
seen mouthing, “RAM, RAM, RAM, RAM, RAM …” RAM (or Rama)
in the Ramayana is a being of great light, love, compassion,
wisdom, and power, who lives in perfect harmony with the dharma,
the One. RAM is the essence of who you are when you realize your
true Self, the Atman.
Sri RAM, JAI RAM, JAI, JAI, RAM (“Beloved RAM, I honor
you”)
If you use RAM when you meditate, say/think/feel RAM on the out
breath. The out breath is the breath you will experience at the end
of your life. Associate it with love, mercy, compassion, bliss,
letting go. Train yourself into this RAM mind.
Another option is the Maya-mantra (“great mantra”) to both
Krishna and RAM:
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna, Krishna, Hare, Hare.
Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama, Rama, Hare, Hare
Krishna represents many aspects of human love: parental love,
romantic love, and love between friends. His instructions to Arjuna
in the Bhagavad Gita are a complete teaching on living life as a
spiritual practice.
Om is a sacred sound mantra, one of the big (seed) syllables
mentioned earlier, sometimes called the sound of the universe. It’s
very primordial—think, “In the beginning was the word, and the
word was God.”
Om Namath Shiva ya (“I bow to Shiva.”)
Other mantras from Buddhism are:
Om Mani padre hum (“I bow to the jewel in the lotus of the
heart.”)
Om Tare Tu Tare Sure Omaha (“to the Mother in the form of
Tara.”)
A mantra from the Greek Christian tradition, in the Philokalia:
Lord Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner.
Mantra can be practiced with a male, a string of prayer beads. In
the West, a male is commonly called a rosary. A male has 108
beads, plus a larger guru bead. A wrist male has 27, 36, or 54
beads, plus a guru bead. All of these numbers—108, 54, 36, and 27
—are sacred numbers in numerology, with digits that add up to
nine. The male is an external aid to doing mantra. You recite the
mantra as you pass the beads through your fingers. The feeling of
the beads moving through your fingers is a wonderful centering
device.
In the traditional way I was taught to use a male; you use your
right hand, passing each bead between the thumb and the third
finger, bead by bead, moving the beads toward you. With each
bead repeat the name of RAM, or whatever your mantra is. Proceed
to the guru bead, pause, and bring your guru or teacher to mind.
Then turn the beads around and go the other way. Do not complete
the circle. That helps you mark each cycle of 108.
Swami RAMDAC, a devout Indian saint of the last century whose
life revolved around listening to the will of RAM to guide his every
activity, tells us, referring to mantra and Kiran (devotional
chanting), “People do not know what the Name of God can do.
Those who repeat it constantly alone know its power. It can purify
our mind completely…. The Name can take us to the summit of
spiritual experience.”
SILENCE
Practicing silence will manifest in calmness and clarity of mind,
more energy, and your enhanced ability to hear others with deeper
understanding. Silence is part of the ongoing exercise of
developing the witness. Notice how your mind interprets the world
around you. If possible, set aside some time in your day or a
weekend day to be in silence. Explain to family and friends your
intention to be silent, so you will have their support in your efforts.
But remember that it’s just an exercise and don’t make a big deal
out of it. There is the external silence of not talking, and there is
the deeper silence of a quiet mind.
BLESSING FOOD
Before I eat, I bless my food. For many people, saying grace in
childhood was a time of impatience, when adults were controlling
the situation, but I’ve discovered that it can become a moment to
reawaken a living truth.
When I get food, I hold the food up or sit with my hands
touching my plate, and I say a blessing. Sometimes in a restaurant
I just quietly go inward; I don’t have to make a big production out
of it or stop other people from eating. I just think about God for a
moment, and I realize that this whole ritual of praying over food is
part of all form. It’s part of law; it’s part of the universe. The bowl
of oatmeal I’m praying over is part of God, as is the farmer who
grew it, the cook who prepared it, and I, who am I making this
prayer, offering it up. We’re all part of God. The hunger the
oatmeal will quiet, those pangs in my stomach, the fire of desire
that will consume this food, these are also part of God. I begin to
sense the oneness of everything; I start to experience a place of
quiet understanding. The more deeply I appreciate the oneness that
is the source of the food, the hunger, my belly, the more I become
one with it all.
In India, I learned a prayer to remind me of this oneness, a way
to offer food and to bring me home:
Brahmarpanam Brahma Hair
Brahmana Brāhmaṇa Hut am
Brahmana Tena Ghantavyam
Brahma karma Yamashina
The act of offering is God (Brahman).
The offering itself (the food) is God.
He/she who offers is God, and the sacred fire (which cooked
the food
and receives the offering) is God.
He/she attains to God, who, in all actions, is absorbed in
God.
Next time you are waiting for food to be served and are feeling
impatient or hungry, use the time to think of God. Then, when you
receive the food, say a blessing and let it remind you that you and
the food are one. Then eat. Rituals can become automatic, or they
can take you deeper. Over time this ritual, for me, has become a
living connection to the Divine and my atonement with
everything manifest in the universe.
KIRAN
In India, Kiran is chanting the names of God, a devotional practice
that both opens your heart and quiets your mind. Much of what was
said above about mantra applies to Kiran, which may use the same
names or phrases, but you can also do Kiran together with others,
with music.
In Glimpses of Divine Vision, the Indian saint Swami RAMDAC
says, “Devotion to God who is seated in the hearts of us all is the
one path that leads the struggling soul to the haven of perfect peace
and joy…. Devotion sweetens life…. Devotion means loving
remembrance of God. Blessed indeed is the heart which adores the
Lord and are the lips which utter His nectar-like name.”
Krishna Was, one of Maharajah’s devotees, has been leading
Kiran in the West for many years. He says, “Chanting is a way of
getting in touch with yourself. It’s an opening of the heart and
letting go of the thoughts passing through the mind. It deepens the
channel of grace, and it’s a way of being present at the moment.”
Here is how he describes the practice:
What we’re singing is the repetition of the Divine Names,
the Hindu names of God. Usually when you call someone’s
name you know who you’re talking to. When we give
something a name, like a baby’s name or if you get a truck, and it’s a Chevy, we know that name defines the person or
thing for us and the name aims our attention at it. With
Kiran it’s a little different.
They say these Divine Names come from a place within
us, a place that’s before thought, before emotion, before
anything to do with concepts or conceptual thinking. And
these Names have been given to us or revealed to us by
beings who, from their deeper experience, became aware of
the names within themselves.
Maharajah used to say over and over again, “RAM Nam
array see, sub pure ho data,” or that from repeating the
names of God, in this case the name of RAM, everything is
brought to completion, everything will be fulfilled.
Repeating these names ripens our karma; the things that
are not helpful for us are removed, and the things that are
helpful for us are brought into the flow of our life—just
through this practice, not through any action of our own. It’s
a ripening process.
As we repeat these names over and over, the center of
spiritual gravity deep inside us gets more solid, denser, and
we’re pulled more deeply within ourselves. That gives us the
ability, or rather creates the kind of conditions, to release a
little sooner all the stuff that catches us in our minds and our
emotions.
If you’re thinking about something, whatever it is, say the
weather, eventually that thought runs out of energy, right? It
no longer holds you, your attention goes to something else
and another thought takes you. Why should that process ever
stop? Why should we ever come back to whatever place
inside that we come back to?
In fact, we are here, in our true nature; that’s where we
live. Our thoughts and our fascination with the external
world and all the sensual and mental stuff and everything,
that’s what pulls us out of our true nature.
Through the repetition of these names we learn to sit
more deeply in our own hearts. We become aware sooner
that our mind is wandering. Little by little, gradually but
inevitably, you enter more deeply into your own being, you
recognize yourself in a new way.
Inevitably is an excellent word—inevitably means you’re
on a train, and the train is going one way, and you’re at the
front of the train running as fast as you can toward the back
of the train, in the opposite direction from where the train is
headed. But it doesn’t matter, because when the train gets to
the station, you get there too. That’s inevitably. That’s my
life.
When you chant you don’t have to imagine anything, have
any fantastic experiences, visualize anything, or make
anything happen. You’re simply asked to sing, and when you
notice that you’re not paying attention, come back. That’s all
you have to do. There are no expectations you have to meet,
which also means there’s no disappointment. Don’t expect a
flaming chariot to come down from the sky and carry you
away whenever you chant. It ain’t going to happen.
Just simply be here. When you notice you’re not here, you
already are! Then go back into the singing, with a little more
intensity. Not trying harder, just giving it a little more
attention. And then, as soon as you notice you’ve left again,
come back.
Gradually, the fascination with external things wears
away, the thoughts and emotions don’t capture us as fiercely
as they did, and the stories we tell ourselves about ourselves
get less compelling. We begin to sit more deeply in
ourselves and to find the Loving Presence within.
PILGRIMAGES
At the temple in India, we used to joke that Maharajah’s five-
climbed yoga that we practiced consisted of eating, sleeping,
drinking tea, gossiping, and walking about. It’s true we were just
hanging out, but we were hanging out in Maharajah’s presence at a
temple in the Himalayas, in his vibratory space that was
transforming us. We had traveled to the other side of the world to
be there, some of us not knowing why or where we were going, but
all searching for something within.
We might not have called it that at the time, but that was a
pilgrimage. Perhaps a pilgrimage into our own hearts, but that is
the best kind anyway. Later we experienced many other places in
India that carry a spiritual charge, and we also found places in the
West that have those qualities of deep peace and spiritual energy.
If you’re traveling or hanging out, you might consider making a
pilgrimage to a holy site and using its spiritual energy as a way to
intensify your own inner work.
RETREAT
A retreat takes you temporarily out of the profusion of sensory and
mental input so you can concentrate on your inner life. Maybe all
you have to do is close the door to your room and shut off the
phone and the computer. On the other hand, you might consider a
retreat at one of the many retreat centers in the West, where your
aspirations are reinforced by other seekers, and where you can get
pure food and some instruction in meditation or other practices.
Listen inside for what type of retreat or center—whether it focuses
on silent meditation or group chanting or some other form of
practice—will work best for you and where you are in your
journey.
WORDS FROM REALIZED BEINGS
Hanging out with realized beings or saints, with their words and
pictures, is a way to inspire and find guidance for your own path. A
realized being is like a pure mirror who shows you all the places
where there is dust on your own mirror. Such a being is a clear
mirror because he or she doesn’t have any attachments, so all you
see are your own attachments writ large. Find words from the great
saints and sages of the world’s religions that inspire your practice.
Copy them into your journal, put them on your refrigerator or by
your computer, and take them into your heart. The words of
realized beings have guided me over the years, and they will help
you navigate your inner journey as they have mine. A few
examples:
God, guru, and Self are One.
RAMONA MAHARISHI
The Self is the heart, self-luminous. Illumination arises from
the heart and reaches the brain, which is the seat of the
mind. The world is seen with the mind; so you see the world
by the reflected light of the Self.
RAMONA MAHARISHI
The intense desire for God-realization is itself the way to it.
SRI ANANDAMIDE MA
Love has to spring spontaneously from within. It is in no way
amenable to any form of inner or outer force. Love and
coercion can never go together; but while love cannot be
forced on anyone, it can be awakened through love itself.
Love is essentially self-communicative. Those who do not
have it catch it from those who have it. Those who receive
love from others cannot be its recipients without giving a
response which—in itself—is the nature of love. True love is
unconquerable and irresistible. It goes on gathering power
and spreading itself until eventually it transforms everyone it
touches. Humanity will attain a new mode of being and life
through the free and unhampered interplay of pure love from
heart-to-heart.
METER BABA
Why is it so difficult to find God? Because you’re looking for
something you’ve never lost.
METER BABA
Knowledge and love of God are ultimately one and the same.
There is no difference between pure knowledge and pure
love.
SRI RAMAKRISHNA
A jar kept in water is full of water inside and outside.
Similarly, the soul immersed in God sees the all-pervading
spirit within and without.
SRI RAMAKRISHNA
The saint is a mirror, everybody can look into it; it is our
face that is distorted; not the mirror.
PALU SAHIB
LISTENING TO YOUR SELF
Inner work can be subtle. As your mind quiets, you begin to listen
more to your own inner voice. Learn to trust your own intuitive
wisdom about your spiritual practice.
You can’t buy someone else’s judgments about your path; you
can’t buy a book’s judgments. You have to run it through your own
intuitive judgment. Maybe you say, “What I really need now is to
develop a quiet meditative space, to quiet my mind more deeply.”
Or, “What I really need now is to open my heart.” Or, “What I
really need is a fierce teacher.” Or “What I really need is a lot of
loving, gentle support.” Or, “What I really need to do is clean out
my psychological stuff a little more before I can go on spiritually.”
If you really keep studying yourself, you will begin to feel where
you are blocked and where your next turn in the path is. Trust it—
learn how to trust your inner guide.
I’m a big advocate of the spiral path, of seeing spiritual work as
a kind of spiral staircase. You may go very deeply into a practice,
and if it starts not to work anymore, you pull back. Sometimes you
do a practice for a while, then you go back into the world, or you
try something else. When you come back to that practice on the
next round, you see it from a whole new level. You see it from a
different place in your consciousness. Who you are when you come
back to it is different. So while a practice is a discipline, it’s better
to be gentle with yourself and not get too violent pushing yourself
too hard. If you feel like you’re getting ahead of yourself or
starting to burn out, stop for a while and try other forms.
Some people come to me and say, “I think I ought to meditate,”
and I say, “Don’t.” Other people come and say, “Oh, thank God, I
can meditate.” It’s just a matter of timing.
In our minds we often get ahead of our intuitive readiness in our
lives or our being. We tend to overkill with our minds. We think
our way into things; our mind conceives the next level of
consciousness before we’re really there, or before we’re ready to go
there. The result is we’re always a little ahead of ourselves in our
thoughts. We don’t slow down enough to be fully in our being.
We’re doing things as we think we ought to do them. Furthermore, we’re
constantly creating new models of ourselves before we’re fully
here with what is. If we can just slow down and be here now …
If you are doing a practice and the practice is not working, you
listen intuitively inside, and you either hear, “If I reinvest in this
practice and come at it from a new perspective, it could come alive
in a new way,” or “I’ll go do something else for a while and come
back to it again later on.” You just have to trust however your
intuition resonates at that moment.
My guidance is usually to go slow. Don’t figure you’re going to
get enlightened yesterday. Relax. Just start to tune yourself to the
spirit within. Don’t make assumptions about how your path will
go. You may say, “Finally, I’ve found my path, the practice that is
right for me,” but don’t assume that practice is what you’ll do for
the rest of your life. Because the who found that practice is, in
the course of doing the practice, going to change into somebody
else. A practice that was appropriate for you initially may not be
useful further down the line. Keep staying open and hearing these
delicate shifts and balances as they go on inside you.
There is value in deepening a practice. Swami Satchitananda
once criticized me for being such an eclectic dilettante. He said,
“Ram Days, you can’t just go around digging shallow wells
everywhere. You have to dig a deep well so that you get fresh
water.” That’s a good metaphor. I could come up with another
metaphor that would be equally sweet for the other side of the
argument.
But when I watch people over time, I see that they start out
being very eclectic, trying different practices, then they get drawn
into one practice quite deeply. When they come out the other end,
like Ramakrishna, they can do all practices, and they’re all the
same. It’s like a funnel or an hourglass: it all goes in one way
through a narrow opening, and at the end it spreads out. So go
gently. Allow yourself to keep trying things on and going into
eclecticism until you genuinely feel pulled into a deeper process.
Gurdjieff, the Russian philosopher, said that while an alarm
clock will wake you up at one moment, later on you may sleep
right through it. You need to keep finding new alarm clocks to
awaken yourself. He said you can have something that awakens
you out of the sleepwalking of your normal waking consciousness
that works one moment, but not the next. Like if you’re reading
something, you’re reading it one moment, and a moment later
you’re busy planning your shopping list while you’re reading it,
and the next moment you’ve gone completely to sleep. Maharajah
once said to us,
“The mind can travel a million miles in the blink of an eye.
Buddha said that.” Practices are just practices. Practice makes
perfect. Once you’re perfected, practice is done. You use a boat to
cross a river, but once you’re on the other side, it’s of no further
use. At the level of pure being, there’s nothing to do, but at the
level of your ego, you want to do something. So do it. There’s
nothing to do, and yet you have to do it. You have to make the
effort to practice, to do Sahara, but you also need to understand
that the person who is making the effort never gets enlightened
anyway. Understand that your ego who says, “Ooh, I can awaken,”
is ego that is going to die or disappear or dissolve in the process.
Who gets enlightened is not who you think you are, but who you
are. Finally, even your trying has to be given up.
Once I was sitting with the Tibetan teacher Program Trunk
Roche, and he said we would do this specific meditation on
expanding outward. So we started to expand outward, looking into
each other’s eyes. After a while he said to me, “Ram Days, are you
trying?”
I said, “Oh yeah.”
He said, “No, Ram Days. Don’t try, just expand.”
There is this seeming paradox that exists between making effort
and just allowing yourself to be, which are really two different
planes of consciousness. When you, as an ego, sense there is
something beyond your limited perception, you make an effort to
go from A to B; you want to follow a path or take a journey. So you
make the effort. You meditate. You go to a retreat. At first, you
may feel blocked and frustrated, so you force yourself; you
discipline yourself. As the process works, and you start to taste
another level of awareness, you begin to see that those patterns of
behavior, the trying and the frustration you experienced out of your
desire for something else, were all within the cause-and-effect
structure of your karma unfolding and how your mind works. In a
sense, it was predictable. That you even seek to get enlightened or
to get closer to God is a tendency (Sankara in Sanskrit) from your
past actions that prepared you to now do spiritual practice.
There is a poignancy in our predicament of being stuck with one
foot in the world and one foot in the spirit. When you get too holy
or too high, the world pulls you back down. You have to dance with
that kind of tension all the time. You keep bringing your worldly
nature and your spiritual self closer and closer into alignment.
The good news is that awakening is built into the system. It just
takes its own time. I’ve learned how to pump people up to
experience a moment of awakening. Sometimes it’s like having a
tire with a big leak in it. You pump it all up, and then you turn
around a moment later, and greed, lust, and fear have all returned,
and it’s flat again. You wonder what happened. Then with someone
else, you just touch them, and they open; everything changes in
their life, and they never go back. I’m learning to listen more
carefully to who people are and where they are in their spiritual
evolution. I’m learning to really honor people, and me, for who
we are at the moment, to understand the appropriateness of a
practice and that our karma and our awakening are unfolding
perfectly.
One of the greatest things that happened in my relationship with
my father was when he was approaching death. I finally allowed
him to be who he was instead of trying to make him into who I
thought he should be. And he stopped trying to make me into who
he thought I should be, and we became friends.
That’s who we all are on this path, spiritual family and friends.
It’s just one big family. We’re all relatives until we realize we’re
really all the same and there’s only one of us—one loving
awareness.
May you be one in that love.
Notes
CHAPTER 1
“You never have to change what you see, only the way you see it.”
Thaddeus Goals, The Lazy Man’s Guide to Enlightenment.
(Layton, UT: Gibbs Smith, 2008) 89.
“The mind can proceed only so far upon what it knows and can
prove …” Albert Einstein, quoted in “Death of a Genius” by
William Miller, Life magazine, May 2, 1955, 64.
CHAPTER 2
“The minute I heard my first love story …” Rum, The Essential
Rum, translated by Coleman Barks with John Boyne. (San
Francisco: Harper-San Francisco, 1995) 106. Permission to
reprint granted by the translator.
“Devotion is easy and natural …” Krishna Kumar SAH, “Shakti”
(Malibu, CA: Love Serve Remember Foundation, 2011).
Permission to reprint granted by the author.
“I will set You on my breath …” Rum, Whispers of the Beloved,
translated by Mafia Maryam and Anima Melina Colin.
(London: Thor sons, 1999) 99.
“My heart was split, and a flower appeared … ” from “Odes of
Solomon,” The Enlightened Heart: An Anthology of Sacred
Poetry, edited by Stephen Mitchell. (New York: Harper &
Row, 1989) 24–25. Permission to reprint granted by the
publisher.
“Let me always feel you present …” Psalm 19, “The Book of
Psalms,” The Enlightened Heart: An Anthology of Sacred
Poetry, edited by Stephen Mitchell. (New York: Harper &
Row, 1989). Permission to reprint granted by the publisher.
“In his mind Hangman had already crossed the sea …” Ramayana,
William Buck. (The Regents of the University of California:
University of California Press, 2013). 182–184, 348–349.
Permission to reprint granted by the publisher.
“Hangman, ever the humble servant, responds, ‘Save me, save me
from the tentacles of egoism!’” from SRI Rāmacaritamānasa
(Gorakhpur, India: Rita Press, n.d.), Descent V (Sunday
Kinda), verse 32, 795.
CHAPTER 3
“The Great Way is not difficult …” Sent’San, the third Chinese
patriarch of Zen, The Hsin Ming, Verses on the Faith-Mind translated by Richard B. Clarke (Buffalo, NY: White
Pine Press, 2001). Permission to reprint granted by the
translator.
“The train clanked and rattled through the suburbs of Tokyo …”
Terry Dobson, an American Aikido master (1937–1992), in
“A Kind Word Turned Away Wrath.” This story has been
widely reprinted and anthologized, but rights are unclear. It
was said to have been printed in Reader's Digest in the 1970s, and it is included in the anthology The Awakened Warrior,
edited by Rick Fields (Archer, 1994) and in Essential
Spirituality by Roger Walsh (John Wiley & Sons, 1999).
“Are you looking for me? I am in the next seat …” Air, from
Air: Ecstatic Poems translated by Robert BLY. (Boston:
Beacon Press, 2004). Permission to reprint granted by the
publisher.
CHAPTER 4
“I’d like to make more mistakes next time …” Nadine Strain, from
the poem “If I Had My Life to Live Over.” This oft-reprinted
essay is usually rendered as a poem, and the author's name
given as Nadine Stair. But Kentucky journalist Byron
Crawford, in his 1994 essay collection Kentucky Stories,
writes that it was originally published as an essay in Family
Circle magazine in March 1978. The magazine misspelled
the author's name: it should have been Nadine Strain. Strain
was a resident of Louisville, Kentucky.
“Sometimes, … I sat in my sunny doorway from sunrise till
noon…” Henry David Thoreau, Walden or, Life In The Woods
(Norwalk, CT: The Easton Press, 1981). 117–118.
In a November 20, 1849, letter Thoreau wrote to Harrison Blake
Concord, “I realized what the Orientals mean by
contemplation and the forsaking of works. To some extent,
and at rare intervals, even I am a yogi.”
CHAPTER 5
“But this: that one can contain …” Rainer Maria Rilke, Dino
Elegies & The Sonnets to Orpheus, edited and translated by
Stephen Mitchell. (New York: Vintage Books, 1982, 1985,
2009) 27. Permission to reprint granted by the translator and
publisher.
“Don’t prolong the past …” Patrol Roche from “On Meditation:
Pithy and Powerful Words from Famed Teachers,”
Shamble Sun magazine, March 2003.
“Consider the possibility that the resistance to the pain and the fear
pain may evoke …” Stephen Levine, Guided Meditations,
Explorations and Healings (New York: Anchor Books, 1991).
Permission to reprint granted by the author.
“Love and death are magnificent gifts, which many of us leave
unopened.” This line by Rilke is commonly translated as,
“Love and death are the greatest gifts that are given to us, but
mostly they are passed on unopened.” In a personal
communication, translator Stephen Mitchell told me, “I did
some searching on the Internet and found this quote in
German, though not the source: ‘Die Liege UND her Tod find
grandiose Geoscience, die vile on us ungeöffnet Lassen.’
The translation should say, ‘Love and death are magnificent
gifts, which many of us leave unopened.’ Rilke doesn't say
that they are the great gifts, and he doesn't say ‘great’; nor
does he say that we ‘pass them on.’ How could we pass on
death? Death is given to us, not by us. The same for love. It's
a gift that we can't pass on; we either open it or not, and that
opening too is a gift. As is the not-opening.”
“Death is an illusion we all seem to buy into …” Stephen Levine,
Guided Meditations, Explorations and Healings (New York:
Anchor Books, 1991). Permission to reprint granted by the
author.
“It may be argued that nobody can talk about death with authority
who has not died…” Lama Anatolia Dorinda in the
foreword to The Tibetan Book of the Dead, compiled and
edited by W.Y. Evans-Went (London: Oxford University
Press, 1927). Permission to reprint granted by the publisher.
“Empty your mind of all thoughts …” Baotou, #16 from Tao Te
Ching, A New English Version, with Foreword and Notes
translated by Stephen Mitchell (New York: HarperCollins,
1988). Permission to reprint granted by the publisher.
“I am without form, without limit …” Swami Rama Birth (1873–1906) from the poem “I am That.” Accessed online.
CHAPTER 7
“Since the day when I met with my Lord …” Air, One Hundred
Poems of Air, Poem CLI, I. 76. “Santo, Sarah Sarah Bali
(O Sadhu! The simple union is the best),” translated by
Rabindranath Tagore, (Madras: Macmillan & Co. Ltd., 1970)
48–49.
“How did the rose ever open its heart …” Hafiz, Love Poems from
God, Twelve Sacred Voices From The East and West,
translated by Daniel Kandinsky (New York: Penguin Compass,
2002) 161. Permission to reprint granted by the translator.
“Don’t go outside your house to see flowers …” Air, from the
poem “A Place to Sit,” Air: Ecstatic Poems translated by
Robert BLY (Boston: Beacon Press, 2004). Permission to
reprint granted by the publisher.
CHAPTER 8
“When you are with someone you love very much …” Swami
Chimamanda from Songs from the Center of the Well,
(Portland, OR: Audra Press, 1983). Permission to reprint
granted by the author and The Movement Center, Inc.
“People do not know what the Name of God can do …” Swami
RAMDAC, RAMDAC Speaks, Vol 5. (Anand ashram, Kerala:
Bharat Vida Haven, India).
“Devotion to God who is seated in the hearts of us all is the one
path …” Swami RAMDAC, Glimpses of Divine Vision,
(Mangalore, India: Shared Press, 1944).
“What we’re singing is the repetition of the Divine Names …”
Krishna Was, transcribed from a Maui retreat, December
2010. Permission to reprint granted by Krishna Was.
“The Self is the heart, self-luminous …” Ramona Maharishi,
Maharishi’s Gospel, 13th ed. (Tiruvannamalai, India: Sri
Ramanashram, 2002) 16.
“The intense desire for God-realization is itself the way to it.”
Anandamide Ma Matrix Darshan, SSRI Anandamide Ma,
translated by Amanda Manga lam (Germany: Overlap S.
Chang, 1983).
“Knowledge and love of God are ultimately one and the same …”
Sri Ramakrishna, Ramakrishna: His Life and Sayings by F.
Max Müller (New Delhi: RPA & Co., 2002) 138.
“A jar kept in water is full of water inside and outside …,” Ibid,
141.
“[T]he saint is a mirror …,” PALU Sahib, 19th century Indian saint
from Ayodhya, quoted in Spread (Jewish Saint of India) by
I.A. Ezekiel (Punjab, India: Rad ha Swami Sat sang Beat,
1966).
Acknowledgments
devotedly compiled material from Ram Days’s
TANAKA SANDY GOAL
talks and writings before we knew this was a book. She was the
original impetus for this project and helped at every step. She
deserves vastly more credit than we can bestow.
Raft Markus, director of the Love Serve Remember
Foundation, approached Sounds True’s publisher, Tami Simon, and
chief editor, Jennifer Brown, with the idea of making an e-book,
but they decided to go whole hog and bring it out in print. Sounds
True’s Amy Most brought a life of editing expertise to bear on
polishing the Mirror. She epitomizes the skill and
enthusiasm of the Sounds True editing and production crew who
have so beautifully midwifed and crafted this work.
Days Ma Kathleen Murphy kept the time and held the ground, so this project could fly. K.K. SAH and Krishna Was contributed
words from their individual journeys to our collective heart that
reverberate with their affection. John Nelsons lent a hand with a
crucial, long-distance edit when he was providentially marooned
on Maui by an East Coast blizzard.
Stephen Mitchell, Daniel Kandinsky, Richard Clarke, Coleman
Barks, and Stephen Levine, among others, have been truly gracious
in allowing their extraordinary work to be reproduced. The
devotion and insight they bring to translating the great saints and
poets, and the brilliance of their own expression, have enriched this
text and the experience of working on it.
Spiritual books are, but markers left beside the path for fellow
pilgrims toward inner light. May dust from the feet of the great
beings who have trod this Way before us grace the words and
thoughts on these pages and guide us home.
About the Author and Coauthor
RAM DAYS
Before becoming Ram Days, he was Richard Alpert, son of the
president of the New York, New Haven and Hartford railroad.
Alpert was an up-and-coming professor of social relations at
Harvard when he befriended a new faculty member named
Timothy Leary. Leary had a transcendent experience with sacred
mushrooms in Mexico, which he shared with Alpert. The two
began a series of psychological research projects using substances
that came to be known as “psychedelics.” In 1963, they were fired
from Harvard for pushing the limits with psychedelic research.
From Ivy halls the duo went on to become counterculture icons,
cresting the wave of the 60s.
By 1966 Alpert had taken psychedelic exploration as far as he
could. He traveled to India looking for a map reader for the
uncharted states of consciousness he had experienced. Through a
seemingly fortuitous chain of events, he met a guru named Need
Karol Baba, called simply Maharajah, who knew. For six months
Alpert lived a enunciate life in an ashram in the hills of the
Himalayas. There he learned yoga and Shakti practice, the
devotional path of the heart.
Alpert returned to America as Ram Days, a name that means
“servant of God.” Feeling that he had brought back a precious
jewel, Ram Days began to share his experiences in talks
everywhere and with young people who came to camp at his
family’s summer home in New Hampshire. At a commune in the
mountains of northern New Mexico, some of his talks were
transcribed and transformed into a spiritual tool box. It was
published as a book in 1970. Be Here Now became a counterculture
bible for millions of seekers setting out on a spiritual path.
Be Here Now resonated with a cultural moment in a way that
few works have, before or since. Ram Days continued to travel and
lecture about spiritual work. For three decades his peripatetic life
brought him in contact with thousands of individuals, and to
collaborations with other teachers, like Program Trunk
Roche during the first summer of Naropa University. Ram Days
authored more books and helped start service organizations such as
a prison ashram project, a project to help people die more
consciously, and the Sea Foundation, which aims to cure
blindness and serve less fortunate people around the world.
While in the middle of writing a book on conscious aging in
1997, titled Still Here, Ram Days suffered a near-fatal stroke that
left him with aphasia and paralysis on his right side. After a
lengthy recovery, though wheelchair bound, he resumed traveling
and lecturing—albeit more slowly. In 2004, Ram Days traveled
once again to India to visit Maharajah’s temple in the hills. When
he returned to the States, he led a retreat on Maui, which ended
with a trip to the emergency room due to a severe urinary and
kidney infection. Once again, he nearly left his body. After the
infection subsided, he settled on Maui. He no longer leaves Hawaii.
Nowadays, he teaches via the Internet on ramdass.org, leads retreats
on Maui, and continues to write.
Since he stopped traveling, Ram Days dwells in a quiet heart
space. His signature teaching of just being here now has led to a
level of deep contentment, and his accommodation of his physical
limitation is as profound as his earlier verbal wit and wisdom were
entertaining. Just as when he was a psychedelic pioneer probing
new boundaries of consciousness, Ram Days remains a trailblazer,
now plumbing our spiritual heart for unconditional love.
RAMESHWAR DAS met Ram Days at a college talk in 1967 and went
on to learn yoga and meditation from him at his family farm in
New Hampshire. From 1970 to 72 Ramesh traveled to India to see
Need Karol Baba. He still visits regularly.
Ramesh worked with Ram Days on the 2010 book Be Love Now,
on the Love Serve Remember recordings, and on the original
toolbox project that became Be Here Now. He has also been a
photographer, including a stint as a freelancer for the New York
Times and other news publications. Ramesh’s work spans a wide
range of photojournalism, editorial, fine art, and commercial
photography. He has taught photography and has also worked as an
environmentalist and writer on coastal matters. He lives with his
wife, a yoga teacher, and two children on the east end of Long
Island.
OTHER BOOKS BY RAM DAYS
Be Love Now: The Path of the Heart (with Ramesh war Was)
Paths to God: Living the Bhagavad Gita
One-Liners: A Mini-Manual for a Spiritual Life
Still Here: Embracing Aging, Changing, and Dying
Compassion in Action: Setting Out on the Path of Service (with
Mirabeau Bush)
Journey of Awakening: A Meditator’s Guidebook
(edited by Daniel Goleman, with Dwarkanath Bonner and Dale
Borglum)
How Can I Help? Stories and Reflections on Service (with Paul
Gorman)
Miracle of Love: Stories about Need Karol Baba
Grist for the Mill (with Stephen Levine)
The Only Dance There Is being Here Now
RAM DAYS AUDIO FROM SOUNDS TRUE
Conscious Aging: On the Nature of Change and Facing Death
Love, Service, Devotion, and the Ultimate Surrender:
Ram Days on the Bhagavad Gita
The Ram Days Audio Collection: A Collection of Three Ram Days
Favorites
Experiments in Truth: A Collection of Classic Lectures from the
’60s to the ’90s
About Sounds True
is a multimedia publisher whose mission is to inspire
SOUNDS TRUE
and support personal transformation and spiritual awakening.
Founded in 1985 and located in Boulder, Colorado, we work with
many of the leading spiritual teachers, thinkers, healers, and
visionary artists of our time. We strive with every title to preserve
the essential “living wisdom” of the author or artist. It is our goal
to create products that not only provide information to a reader or
listener, but that also embody the quality of a wisdom
transmission.
For those seeking genuine transformation, Sounds True is your
trusted partner. At SoundsTrue.com you will find a wealth of free
resources to support your journey, including exclusive weekly
audio interviews, free downloads, interactive learning tools, and
other special savings on all our titles.
To learn more, please visit SoundsTrue.com/bonus/free_gifts or
call us toll-free at 800-333-9185.
Sounds True, Inc.
Boulder, CO 80306
© 2013 by the Love Serve Remember Foundation
SOUNDS TRUE is a trademark of Sounds True, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this
book may be used or reproduced in any manner without written permission from the
authors and publisher.
Cover and book design by Jennifer Miles
Printed in the United States of America
Every effort has been made to obtain permissions for pieces quoted in this work, which
can be found on page 151. If any required acknowledgments have been omitted, or any
rights overlooked, it is unintentional. Please notify the publisher of any omission.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ram Days.
Polishing the mirror : how to live from your spiritual heart /
Ram Days, with Ramesh war Was ; conceived by Janeiro Sandy Goal.
Pages cm
ISBN 978-1-60407-967-8
1. Spiritual life. I. Was, Ramesh war. II. Title.
BL624. R355 2013
204’.4--dc23
2013005622
E-Book ISBN 978-1-62203-167-2
Enhanced e-book ISBN 978-1-62203-137-5